
                           WHAT IS VIRTUAL REALITY?
                                       
   
   
   A Homebrew Introduction and Information Resource List
   
   Version 2.1, Oct 8 1993
   
   Jerry Isdale,
   
   i.e. Isdale Engineering
   
   email: 72330.770@compuserve.com (preferred)
   
   (alternate email: isdale@well.sf.ca.us)
   
   
   
   (with thanks to the *many* people who contributed bits, bytes and
   words either directly to me or by posting to various electronic
   sources)
   
   
   
   
     _________________________________________________________________
   
   The primary distribution points for electronic form of this paper are:
   
   1) CompuServe CyberForum as 'whatvr.zip'
   
   2) ftp site sunee.uwaterloo.ca in the pub/vr/documents area as
   whatisvr.txt
   
   3) ftp site ftp.u.washington.edu in public/virtual-worlds/papers as
   whatisvr.txt
   
   
   
   This document freely distributable to various electronic networks,
   BBS, etc. It can be used as a handout for seminars sponsored by
   schools and professional associations. I only ask that you keep my
   name as the primary author/editor and do not charge for it beyond
   normal on-line connect charges. If you have any corrections, comments
   or additions, please send them to me at one of the above email
   addresses.
   
   
   
   Introduction
   
   
   
   This paper is divided into two parts. The first section is intended as
   an introduction to Virtual Reality (VR), primarily as background for
   development efforts. It is not meant to be The Definitive Treatise on
   VR. The reader is encouraged to search out other introductions and
   form your own opinions. The second section provides a large collection
   of places to search out more information on VR. It lists conventional
   books, on-line news groups, BBS, Ftp sites, local interest groups and
   commercial VR companies.
   
   
   
   This is the second released version of this document. It contains a
   number of new information and lots of updated contact information in
   the second part. I don't know if I will be revising it again.
   
   
   
   An excellent short treatment of the state of the art and a taxonomy of
   VR is a report on the US Government's National Science Foundation
   invitational workshop on Interactive Systems Program held March 23-24,
   1992. It was published in the given in the ACM Siggraph publication
   "Computer Graphics", Vol. 26, #3, August 1992. The purpose of the
   workshop was to identify and recommend future research directions in
   the area of virtual environments. A longer exposition of this taxonomy
   can be found in the MIT Journal "Presence" Vol. 1 #2.
   
   
   
                          I. WHAT IS VIRTUAL REALITY
                                       
   
   
   The term Virtual Reality (VR) is used by many different people with
   many meanings. There are some people to whom VR is a specific
   collection of technologies, that is a Head Mounted Display, Glove
   Input Device and Audio. Some other people stretch the term to include
   conventional books, movies or pure fantasy and imagination. The NSF
   taxonomy mentioned in the introduction can cover these as well.
   However, my personal preference, and for purposes of this paper, we
   restrict VR to computer mediated systems. The best definition of
   Virtual Reality I have seen to date comes from the book "The Silicon
   Mirage" (see section on VR Books):
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality is a way for humans to visualize, manipulate and
   interact with computers and extremely complex data"
   
   
   
   The visualization part refers to the computer generating visual,
   auditory or other sensual outputs to the user of a world within the
   computer. This world may be a CAD model, a scientific simulation, or a
   view into a database. The user can interact with the world and
   directly manipulate objects within the world. Some worlds are animated
   by other processes, perhaps physical simulations, or simple animation
   scripts. Interaction with the virtual world, at least with near real
   time control of the viewpoint, in my opinion, is a critical test for a
   'virtual reality'.
   
   
   
   Some people object to the term "Virtual Reality", saying it is an
   oxymoron. Other terms that have been used are Synthetic Environments,
   Cyberspace, Artificial Reality, Simulator Technology, etc. VR is the
   most common and sexiest. It has caught the attention of the media.
   
   
   
   The applications being developed for VR run a wide spectrum, from
   games to architectural and business planning. Many applications are
   worlds that are very similar to our own, like CAD or architectural
   modeling. Some applications provide ways of viewing from an
   advantageous perspective not possible with the real world, like
   scientific simulators and telepresense systems, air traffic control
   systems. Other applications are much different from anything we have
   ever directly experienced before. These latter applications may be the
   hardest, and most interesting systems. Visualizing the ebb and flow of
   the world's financial markets. Navigating a large corporate
   information base, etc.
   
I.1. Types of VR Systems

   
   
   A major distinction of VR systems is the mode with which they
   interface to the user. This section describes some of the common modes
   used in VR systems.
   
  I.1.1. WINDOW ON WORLD SYSTEMS (WOW)
  
   
   
   Some systems use a conventional computer monitor to display the visual
   world. This sometimes called Desktop VR or a Window on a World (WoW).
   This concept traces its lineage back through the entire history of
   computer graphics. In 1965, Ivan Sutherland laid out a research
   program for computer graphics in a paper called "The Ultimate Display"
   that has driven the field for the past nearly thirty years.
   
   
   
   "One must look at a display screen," he said, "as a window through
   which one beholds a virtual world. The challenge to computer graphics
   is to make the picture in the window look real, sound real and the
   objects act real." [quoted from Computer Graphics V26#3]
   
  I.1.2. VIDEO MAPPING
  
   
   
   A variation of the WoW approach merges a video input of the user's
   silhouette with a 2D computer graphic. The user watches a monitor that
   shows his body's interaction with the world. Myron Kruger has been a
   champion of this form of VR since the late 60's. He has published two
   books on the subject: "Artificial Reality" and "Artificial Reality
   II". At least one commercial system uses this approach, the Mandala
   system. This system is based on a Commodore Amiga with some added
   hardware and software. A version of the Mandala is used by the cable
   TV channel Nickelodeon for a game show (Nick Arcade) to put the
   contestants into what appears to be a large video game.
   
  I.1.3. IMMERSIVE SYSTEMS
  
   
   
   The ultimate VR systems completely immerse the user's personal
   viewpoint inside the virtual world. These "immersive" VR systems are
   often equipped with a Head Mounted Display (HMD). This is a helmet or
   a face mask that holds the visual and auditory displays. The helmet
   may be free ranging, tethered, or it might be attached to some sort of
   a boom armature.
   
   
   
   A nice variation of the immersive systems use multiple large
   projection displays to create a 'Cave' or room in which the viewer(s)
   stand. An early implementation was called "The Closet Cathedral" for
   the ability to create the impression of an immense environment. within
   a small physical space. The Holodeck used in the television series
   "Star Trek: The Next Generation" is afar term extrapolation of this
   technology.
   
  I.1.4. TELEPRESENCE
  
   
   
   Telepresence is a variation on visualizing complete computer generated
   worlds. This a technology links remote sensors in the real world with
   the senses of a human operator. The remote sensors might be located on
   a robot, or they might be on the ends of WALDO like tools. Fire
   fighters use remotely operated vehicles to handle some dangerous
   conditions. Surgeons are using very small instruments on cables to do
   surgery without cutting a major hole in their patients. The
   instruments have a small video camera at the business end. Robots
   equipped with telepresence systems have already changed the way deep
   sea and volcanic exploration is done. NASA plans to use telerobotics
   for space exploration. There is currently a joint US/Russian project
   researching telepresence for space rover exploration.
   
  I.1.5. MIXED REALITY
  
   
   
   Merging the Telepresence and Virtual Reality systems gives the Mixed
   Reality or Seamless Simulation systems. Here the computer generated
   inputs are merged with telepresence inputs and/or the users view of
   the real world. A surgeon's view of a brain surgery is overlaid with
   images from earlier CAT scans and real-time ultrasound. A fighter
   pilot sees computer generated maps and data displays inside his fancy
   helmet visor or on cockpit displays.
   
  I.1.6. FISH TANK VIRTUAL REALITY
  
   
   
   The phrase "fish tank virtual reality" was used to describe a Canadian
   VR system reported in the 1993 InterCHI proceedings. It combines a
   stereoscopic monitor display using LCD Shutter glasses with a
   mechanical head tracker. The resulting system is superior to simple
   stereo-WoW systems due to the motion parallax effects introduced by
   the head tracker. (see INTERCHI '93 Conference Proceedings, ACM
   Press/Addison Wesley , ISBN 0-201-58884-6)
   
I.2. VR Hardware

   
   
   There are a number of specialized types of hardware devices that have
   been developed or used for Virtual Reality applications.
   
  I.2.1. IMAGE GENERATORS
  
   
   
   One of the most time consuming tasks in a VR system is the generation
   of the images. Fast computer graphics opens a very large range of
   applications aside from VR, so there has been a market demand for
   hardware acceleration for a long while. There are currently a number
   of vendors selling image generator cards for PC level machines, many
   of these are based on the Intel i860 processor. These cards range in
   price from about $2000 up to $6 or $10,000. Silicon Graphics Inc. has
   made a very profitable business of producing graphics workstations.
   SGI boxes are some of the most common processors found in VR
   laboratories and high end systems. SGI boxes range in price from under
   $10,000 to over $100,000. The simulator market has produced several
   companies that build special purpose computers designed expressly for
   real time image generation. These computers often cost several
   hundreds of thousands of dollars.
   
  I.2.2. MANIPULATION AND CONTROL DEVICES
  
   
   
   One key element for interaction with a virtual world, is a means of
   tracking the position of a real world object, such as a head or hand.
   There are numerous methods for position tracking and control. Ideally
   a technology should provide 3 measures for position(X, Y, Z) and 3
   measures of orientation (roll, pitch, yaw). One of the biggest problem
   for position tracking is latency, or the time required to make the
   measurements and preprocess them before input to the simulation
   engine.
   
   
   
   The simplest control hardware is a conventional mouse, trackball or
   joystick. While these are two dimensional devices, creative
   programming can use them for 6D controls. There are a number of 3 and
   6 dimensional mice/trackball/joystick devices being introduced to the
   market at this time. These add some extra buttons and wheels that are
   used to control not just the XY translation of a cursor, but its Z
   dimension and rotations in all three directions. The Global Devices 6D
   Controller is one such 6D joystick It looks like a racket ball mounted
   on a short stick. You can pull and twist the ball in addition to the
   left/right & forward/back of a normal joystick. Other 3D and 6D mice,
   joystick and force balls are available from Logitech, Mouse System
   Corp. among others.
   
   
   
   One common VR device is the instrumented glove. The use of a glove to
   manipulate objects in a computer is covered by a basic patent in the
   USA. Such a glove is outfitted with sensors on the fingers as well as
   an overall position/orientation tracker. There are a number of
   different types of sensors that can be used. VPL (holders of the
   patent) made several DataGloves, mostly using fiber optic sensors for
   finger bends and magnetic trackers for overall position. Mattel
   manufactured the PowerGlove for use with the Nintendo game system, for
   a short time. This device is easily adapted to interface to a personal
   computer. It provides some limited hand location and finger position
   data using strain gauges for finger bends and ultrasonic position
   sensors. The gloves are getting rare, but some can still be found at
   Toys R' Us and other discount stores. Anthony Clifton recently posted
   this suggestion for a" very good resource for PowerGloves etc.: small
   children. A friend's son had gotten a glove a couple years ago and
   almost NEVER used it, so I bought it off the kid. Remember children
   like money more than toys they never use."
   
   
   
   The concept of an instrumented glove has been extended to other body
   parts. Full body suits with position and bend sensors have been used
   for capturing motion for character animation, control of music
   synthesizers, etc. in addition to VR applications.
   
  I.2.3. POSITION TRACKING
  
   
   
   Mechanical armatures can be used to provide fast and very accurate
   tracking. Such armatures may look like a desk lamp (for basic
   position/orientation) or they may be highly complex exoskeletons (for
   more detailed positions). The drawbacks of mechanical sensors are the
   encumbrance of the device and its restrictions on motion. Exos Systems
   builds one such exoskeleton for hand control. It also provides force
   feedback. Shooting Star system makes a low cost armature system for
   head tracking. Fake Space Labs and LEEP Systems make much more
   expensive and elaborate armature systems for use with their display
   systems.
   
   
   
   Ultrasonic sensors can be used to track position and orientation. A
   set of emitters and receivers are used with a known relationship
   between the emitters and between the receivers. The emitters are
   pulsed in sequence and the time lag to each receiver is measured.
   Triangulation gives the position. Drawbacks to ultrasonics are low
   resolution, long lag times and interference from echoes and other
   noises in the environment. Logitech and Transition State are two
   companies that provide ultrasonic tracking systems.
   
   
   
   Magnetic trackers use sets of coils that are pulsed to produce
   magnetic fields. The magnetic sensors determine the strength and
   angles of the fields. Limitations of these trackers are a high latency
   for the measurement and processing, range limitations, and
   interference from ferrous materials within the fields. However,
   magnetic trackers seem to be one of the preferred methods. The two
   primary companies selling magnetic trackers are Polhemus and
   Ascension.
   
   
   
   Optical position tracking systems have been developed. One method uses
   a ceiling grid LEDs and a head mounted camera. The LEDs are pulsed in
   sequence and the cameras image is processed to detect the flashes. Two
   problems with this method are limited space (grid size) and lack of
   full motion (rotations). Another optical method uses a number of video
   cameras to capture simultaneous images that are correlated by high
   speed computers to track objects. Processing time (and cost of fast
   computers) is a major limiting factor here. One company selling an
   optical tracker is Origin Instruments.
   
   
   
   Inertial trackers have been developed that are small and accurate
   enough for VR use. However, these devices generally only provide
   rotational measurements. They are also not accurate for slow position
   changes.
   
  I.2.4. STEREO VISION
  
   
   
   Stereo vision is often included in a VR system. This is accomplished
   by creating two different images of the world, one for each eye. The
   images are computed with the viewpoints offset by the equivalent
   distance between the eyes. There are a large number of technologies
   for presenting these two images. The images can be placed side-by-side
   and the viewer asked (or assisted) to cross their eyes. The images can
   be projected through differently polarized filters, with corresponding
   filters placed in front of the eyes. Anaglyph images user red/blue
   glasses to provide a crude (no color) stereovision.
   
   
   
   The two images can be displayed sequentially on a conventional monitor
   or projection display. Liquid Crystal shutter glasses are then used to
   shut off alternate eyes in synchronization with the display. When the
   brain receives the images in rapid enough succession, it fuses the
   images into a single scene and perceives depth. A fairly high display
   swapping rate (min. 60hz) is required to avoid perceived flicker. A
   number of companies made low cost LC shutter glasses for use with TVs
   (Sega, Nintendo, Toshiba, etc.). There are circuits and code for
   hooking these up to a computer available on many of the On-line
   systems, BBSs and Internet FTP sites mentioned later. However,
   locating the glasses themselves is getting difficult as none are still
   being made or sold for their original use. Stereographics sells a very
   nice commercial LC shutter system called CrystalEyes.
   
   
   
   Another alternative method for creating stereo imagery on a computer
   is to use one of several split screen methods. These divide the
   monitor into two parts and display left and right images at the same
   time. One method places the images side by side and conventionally
   oriented. It may not use the full screen or may otherwise alter the
   normal display aspect ratio. A special hood viewer is placed against
   the monitor which helps the position the eyes correctly and may
   contain a divider so each eye e sees only its own image. Most of these
   hoods, such as the one for the V5 of Rend386, use fresnel lenses to
   enhance the viewing. An alternative split screen method orients the
   images so the top of each points out the side of the monitor. A
   special hood containing mirrors is used to correctly orient the
   images. A very nice low cost (under $200) unit of this type is the
   Cyberscope available from Simsalabim.
   
  I.2.5. HEAD MOUNTED DISPLAY (HMD)
  
   
   
   One hardware device closely associated with VR is the Head Mounted
   Device (HMD).
   
   These use some sort of helmet or goggles to place small video displays
   in front of each eye, with special optics to focus and stretch the
   perceived field of view. Most HMDs use two displays and can provide
   stereoscopic imaging. Others use a single larger display to provide
   higher resolution, but without the stereoscopic vision.
   
   
   
   Most lower cost HMDs ($3000-10,000 range ) use LCD displays, while
   others use small CRTs, such as those found in camcorders. The more
   expensive HMDs use special CRTs mounted along side the head or optical
   fibers to pipe the images from non-head mounted displays. ($60,000 and
   up). A HMD requires a position tracker in addition to the helmet.
   Alternatively, the display can be mounted on an armature for support
   and tracking (a Boom display).
   
  I.2.6. HEALTH HAZARDS FROM STEREOSCOPIC DISPLAYS
  
   
   
   There was an article supplement with CyberEdge Journal issue #17
   entitled "What's Wrong with your Head Mounted Display". It is a
   summary report on the findings of a study done by the Edinburgh
   Virtual Environment Lab, Dept. of Psychology, Univ. of Edinburgh on
   the eye strain effects of stereoscopic Head Mounted Displays. There
   have been a number of anecdotal reports of stress with HMDs and other
   stereoscopic displays, but few, if any, good clinical studies. This
   study was done very carefully and the results are a cause for some
   concern.
   
   
   
   The basic test was to put 20 young adults on a stationary bicycle and
   let them cycle around a virtual rural road setting using a HMD (VPL LX
   EyePhone and a second HMD LEEP optic equipped system). After 10
   minutes of light exercise, the subjects were tested...
   
   
   
   "The results were alarming: measures of distance vision , binocular
   fusion and convergence displayed clear signs of binocular stress in a
   significant number of the subjects. Over half the subjects also
   reported symptoms of such stress, such as blurred vision."
   
   
   
   The article goes on to describe the primary reason for the stress -
   the difference between the image focal depth and the disparity.
   Normally, the when your eyes look at a close object they focus
   (accommodate) close and also rotate inward (converge). When they
   accommodate on a far object, the eyes also diverge. However, a
   stereoscopic display does not change the either the effective focal
   plane (set by the optics) and the disparity depth. The eyes strain to
   decouple the signals.
   
   
   
   The article discusses some potential solutions, but notes that most of
   them (dynamic focal/disparity) are difficult to implement. It mentions
   monoscopic HMDs only to say that while they would seem to avoid the
   problems, they were not tested. The article does not discuss non-HMD
   stereoscopic devices at all, but I would extrapolate that they should
   show some similar problems. The full article is available from
   CyberEdge Journal for a small fee.
   
   
   
   There has been a fair bit of discussion ongoing in the
   sci.virtual-worlds newsgroup (check the Sept./Oct. 93 archives) about
   this and some other studies. One contributor, Dipl.-Ing. Olaf H.
   Kelle, University of Wuppertal, Germany, reported only 10% of his
   users showing eye strain. His system is setup with a focal depth of 3m
   which seems to be a better, more comfortable viewing distance. Others
   have noted that long duration monitor use often leads to the user
   staring or not blinking. It is common for VDT users to be cautioned to
   look away from the screen occasionally to adjust their focal depth and
   to blink. Another contributor, John Nagle provided the following list
   of other potential problems with HMDs: electrical safety,
   Falling/tripping over real world objects, simulator sickness
   (disorientation due to conflicting motion signals from eyes and inner
   ear), Eye Strain, Induced post-HMD accidents ("some flight simulators
   some flight simulators, usually those for military fighter aircraft,
   it's been found necessary to forbid simulator users to fly or drive
   for a period of time after flying the simulator".).
   
I.3. Levels of VR Hardware Systems

   
   
   The following defines a number of levels of VR hardware systems. These
   are not hard levels, especially towards the more advanced systems.
   
  I.3.1. ENTRY VR (EVR)
  
   
   
   The 'Entry Level' VR system takes a stock personal computer or
   workstation and implements a WoW system. The system may be based on an
   IBM clone (MS-DOS/Windows) machine or an Apple Macintosh, or perhaps a
   Commodore Amiga. The DOS type machines (IBM PC clones) are the most
   prevalent. There are Mac based systems, but few very fast rendering
   ones. Whatever the base computer it includes a graphic display, a 2D
   input device like a mouse, trackball or joystick, the keyboard, hard
   disk & memory.
   
  I.3.2. BASIC VR (BVR)
  
   
   
   The next step up from an EVR system adds some basic interaction and
   display enhancements. Such enhancements would include a stereographic
   viewer (LCD Shutter glasses) and a input/control device such as the
   Mattel PowerGlove and/or a multidimensional (3D or 6D) mouse or
   joystick.
   
  I.3.3. ADVANCED VR (AVR)
  
   
   
   The next step up the VR technology ladder is to add a rendering
   accelerator and/or frame buffer and possibly other parallel processors
   for input handling, etc. The simplest enhancement in this area is a
   faster display card. For the PC class machines, there are a number of
   new fast VGA and SVGA accelerator cards. These can make a dramatic
   improvement in the rendering performance of a desktop VR system. Other
   more sophisticated image processors based on the Texas Instruments
   TI34020 or Intel i860 processor can make even more dramatic
   improvements in rendering capabilities. The i860 in particular is in
   many of the high end professional systems. The Silicon Graphics
   Reality Engine uses a number of i860 processors in addition to the
   usual SGI workstation hardware to achieve stunning levels of realism
   in real time animation.
   
   
   
   An AVR system might also add a sound card to provide mono, stereo or
   true 3D audio output. Some sound cards also provide voice recognition.
   This would be an excellent additional input device for VR
   applications.
   
  I.3.4. IMMERSION VR (IVR)
  
   
   
   An Immersion VR system adds some type of immersive display system: a
   HMD, a Boom, or multiple large projection type displays (Cave).
   
   
   
   An IVR system might also add some form of tactile, haptic and touch
   feedback interaction mechanisms. The area of Touch or Force Feedback
   (known collectively as Haptics) is a very new research arena.
   
  I.3.5. COCKPIT SIMULATORS
  
   
   
   A common variation on VR is to use a Cockpit or Cab compartment to
   enclose the user. The virtual world is viewed through some sort of
   view screen and is usually either projected imagery or a conventional
   monitor. The cockpit simulation is very well known in aircraft
   simulators, with a history dating back to the early Link Flight
   Trainers (1929?). The cockpit is often mounted on a motion platform
   that can give the illusion of a much larger range of motion. Cabs are
   also used in driving simulators for ships, trucks, tanks and 'battle
   mechs'. The latter are fictional walking robotic devices (i.e. the
   Star Wars films). The BattleTech location based entertainment (LBE)
   centers use this type of system.
   
  I.3.6. SIMNET, DEFENSE SIMULATION INTERNET
  
   
   
   One of the biggest VR projects is the Defense Simulation Internet.
   This project is a standardization being pushed by the USA Defense
   Department to enable diverse simulators to be interconnected into a
   vast network. It is an outgrowth of the Defense Advanced Research
   Projects Administration (DARPA) SIMNET project of the later 1980s.
   SIMNET was/is a collection of tank simulators (Cab type) that are
   networked together to allow unit tactical training. Simulators in
   Germany can operate in the same virtual world as simulators in the
   USA, partaking of the same battle exercise.
   
   
   
   The basic Distributed Interactive Simulation (DIS) protocol has been
   defined by the Orlando Institute for Simulation & Training. It is the
   basis for the next generation of SIMNET, the Defense Simulation
   Internet (DSI). (love those acronyms!) An accessible, if somewhat
   dark, treatment of SIMNET and DSI can be found in the premier issue of
   WIRED magazine (January 1993) entitled "War is Virtual Hell" by Bruce
   Sterling.
   
   
   
   The basic DIS protocol has been adopted as a standard for
   communication between distributed simulations by the IEEE. Basic
   information on DIS and SIMNET, including a C library to support the
   communication protocol is available via FTP from the Internet site
   taurus.cs.nps.navy.mil (pub/warbreaker/NPS_DIS...). Other contact
   points for DIS include:
   
   
   
   Danette Haworth Institute for Simulation & Training 12424 Research
   Parkway, Suite 300 Orlando, Florida 32826 (407)658-5000
   
   
   
   Defense Modeling and Simulation Office (DMSO) has an Internet site to
   support Advanced Distributed Simulation Technology (ADST). The IP
   address is 137.249.32.17
   
   Administrative Contact: Kevin Mullally 407.382.4580, Technical
   Contact: Brad Mohning 408.473.4962
   
I.4. Available VR Software Systems

   
   
   There are currently quite a number of different efforts to develop VR
   technology. Each of these projects have different goals and approaches
   to the overall VR technology. Large and small University labs have
   projects underway (UNC, Cornell, U.Rochester, etc.). ARPA , NIST,
   National Science Foundation and other branches of the US Government
   are investing heavily in VR and other simulation technologies. There
   are industry supported laboratories too, like the Human Interface
   Technologies Laboratory (HITL) in Seattle and the Japanese NTT
   project. Many existing and startup companies are also building and
   selling world building tools (Autodesk, IBM', Sense8, VREAM).
   
   
   
   There are two major categories for the available VR software: toolkits
   and authoring systems. Toolkits are programming libraries, generally
   for C or C++ that provide a set of functions with which a skilled
   programmer can create VR applications. Authoring systems are complete
   programs with graphical interfaces for creating worlds without
   resorting to detailed programming. These usually include some sort of
   scripting language in which to describe complex actions, so they are
   not really non-programming, just much simpler programming. The
   programming libraries are generally more flexible and have faster
   renders than the authoring systems, but you must be a very skilled
   programmer to use them. (Note to developers: if i fail to mention your
   system below, please let me know and I will try to remember to include
   it when, and if, i update this document again)
   
  I.4.1. FREEWARE VR PROGRAMS
  
   
   
   At the low end of the VR spectrum are the freeware products and garage
   or home-brew VR hackers (like me!). There are currently a few fast
   rendering programs that have been released with source code and no
   charge. These programs are generally copyrighted freeware, which means
   that the original creators retain the copyright and commercial use is
   restricted. They are not polished commercial programs, and are often
   written by students. However, these programs exist to give people a
   very low cost entry into the VR world.
   
   
   
   Rend386 is one such freeware library and world player written for
   386/486 DOS systems. It was written by Dave Stampe and Bernie Roehl at
   the University of Waterloo, Canada. It creates images at a resolution
   of 320x200x256 and supports various extra devices such as the Mattel
   PowerGlove, LC shutter glasses, Split Screen stereo viewers etc.
   Rend386 is provided both as a complete world player and as a C source
   code. It does not provide a full authoring environment for world and
   object building. Dave and Bernie co-authored the book "Virtual Reality
   Creations" with John Eagan. It serves as the primary user
   documentation for Rend386 Version 5. There is also an electronic mail
   list for Rend386. Rend386 is available on the via ftp
   (sunee.uwaterloo.ca), CompuServe's CyberForum, and also from a large
   number of BBSes.
   
   
   
   ACK3D is a freeware C programming library developed by Lary Meyer that
   provides a fast 'raycasting' renderer for PC systems. This technique
   restricts the user motion somewhat, but allows textures to be drawn at
   very impressive rates. The technique gained a fair bit of exposure
   with the Wolfenstein 3D series of shareware games. ACK3D can be found
   on the CompuServe Gamer's forum and also via ftp from
   ftp.u.washington.edu in the pub/virtual-worlds/cheap-vr area.
   
   
   
   Gossamer, a freeware VR package for the Apple Macintosh system,
   written by Jon Blossom. Source code has not been released yet, but Jon
   has released a demo and a Think C library. Jon is currently working on
   a new version that will support file compatibility with Rend386 V5 and
   a more extensive user program. The current version is available on via
   ftp from ftp.apple.com in the directory pub/VR, and also on
   CompuServe's CyberForum.
   
   
   
   Multiverse is a freeware UNIX based client/server system written by
   Robert Grant. It is a multi-user, non-immersive, X-Windows based
   Virtual Reality system, primarily focused on entertainment/research.
   It includes capabilities for setting up multi-person worlds and a
   client/server type world simulation over a local or long haul network.
   Multiverse source and binaries for several flavors of UNIX are
   available via anonymous ftp from medg.lcs.mit.edu in the directory
   pub/multiverse
   
   
   
   The MRToolkit is a programming library for UNIX systems that is
   available at no cost from the University of Alberta, but the licensing
   agreement stipulates no commercial products may be made with it.
   
   
   
   VEOS is another programming toolkit that provides a basis for VR
   development on networked UNIX machines. Source code is available from
   the Human Interface Technology Lab (HITL) at University of Washington.
   (ftp.u.washington.edu)
   
  I.4.2. VR PROGRAMS FOR UNDER $200
  
   
   
   There are a number of commercial VR programs that sell for under $200.
   Many computer games that can be considered in this category, such as
   Wolfenstein 3D, but these are often closed systems that do not allow
   much customizing or world building by the user.
   
   
   
   Virtual Reality Studio (aka VR Studio, VRS) is a very low cost VR
   authoring system that does allow the user to define their own virtual
   worlds. This program is also known as "3D Construction Kit" in Europe.
   The program has a fairly nice graphical interface and includes a
   simple scripting language. It is available for about $100 from Domark
   for PC and Amiga systems. Worlds created with the program can be
   freely distributed with a player program. There are a quite number of
   these worlds available from the BBSes, and other sources. Compuserve's
   Cyberforum has several in its libraries, like the company provided
   demo VRSDMO.ZIP (VRS.TXT gives a solution to the demo game). Version 2
   of VR Studio was released in early 1993. It has many new features
   including a much enhanced scripting language and editor, but also an
   annoying number of bugs. The developers of VRS (Dimension
   International) are working hard to correct these.
   
   
   
   Another entrant into the low cost market is the Lepton VR Data
   Modeling Toolkit. This package is a collection of C programming
   libraries for real-time 3d data modeling on DOS systems. Version 1.0
   is scheduled to be released in Fal1993 and will cost approximately
   $150.
   
   
   
   For the Macintosh market there are the Qd3d, 3dPane, and SmartPane C++
   libraries from ViviStar Consulting ($192 for full package). These
   provide a full suite of 3D graphics functions for popular Macintosh
   C++ compilers as well as Think C 6.0.
   
  I.4.3. VR PACKAGES UNDER $1000
  
   
   
   The next level of VR System is those costing between two hundred and
   one thousand dollars. There are some very excellent professional
   packages appearing in this price range in the last year. Most of these
   systems do not require any specialized hardware beyond the basic
   computer system.
   
   
   
   VREAM is a complete VR authoring package for MS-DOS systems for about
   $795 from VREAM, Inc.. It provides a nice GUI environment for creation
   of objects and worlds, as well as a fairly powerful scripting
   language. VREAM supports a very wide variety of input and output
   devices, including HMDs. Two versions of the runtime system are
   available at a much lower cost to provide only the playback ability.
   The lower cost runtime (under $50) will work only with standard VGA
   display and mouse/joystick. The advanced runtime system supports more
   devices.
   
   
   
   Virtus Walkthrough, from Virtus Corp., is available for both Mac and
   Windows systems. It provides a nice 3D modeling package and the
   ability to interactively control the viewpoint within the created
   worlds. However, it does not allow for interaction with the objects.
   The latest version Walkthrough Pro supports texture maps, including
   QuickTime movies.
   
   
   
   Sense 8 has announced a $795 programming library for Windows called
   World Tool Kit for Windows. This will be released late in 1993 as a
   DLL for Windows systems. It will work directly with standard SVGA
   displays and show worlds with texture mapping either within a window
   or allow full screen display. The programming library will support DDE
   so a virtual world can be controlled from a spreadsheet, database or
   other program.
   
  I.4.4. VR SOFTWARE FOR OVER $1000
  
   
   
   The heavy duty professional VR software packages begin at about $1000
   and can go up dramatically. The hardware required to run these systems
   varies. Most support a DOS environment with add in rendering cards
   like the i860 based SPEA Fireboard. A few work on SGI and other
   workstation system. There are also other packages available that run
   on vendor specific hardware configurations. The really high end
   packages require extremely expensive hardware "Image Generators" such
   as those used in flight simulators.
   
   
   
   The Sense8 World Tool Kit (WTK) is probably the most widely used
   product of this type. It runs on a wide variety of platforms from i860
   assisted PCs to high end SGI boxes. It has won several awards for
   excellence.
   
   
   
   The Autodesk Cyberspace Development kit is another product in this
   range. It is a C++ library for MSDOS systems using the Metaware
   HighC/C++ compiler and Pharlap DOS 32bit extender. It supports VESA
   displays as well as several rendering accelerator boards (SPEA
   Fireboard, FVS Sapphire, Division's dView). I used this system for a
   few months and found it requires a strong background in C++ and a
   rendering accelerator card. VESA speeds were about 4 frames per
   second.
   
   
   
   Straylight Corp. makes a package called PhotoVR that uses special
   rendering boards (Intel ActionMedia cards) to provide excellent
   texture mapped walkthrough environments.
   
   
   
   Dimension International's Superscape VRT3 is a very powerful authoring
   system for virtual worlds. It provides both a graphical environment
   for object and world creation and a lower level C library.
   
   
   
   Division Ltd. sells a programming environment for VR called dVS. This
   package runs on SGI systems, IBM RS/6000 workstations and a
   proprietary Division workstation. They also sell a complete world
   authoring and simulation program similar to VREAM and VRT3 called
   dVise.
   
   
   
   Lightscape is a radiosity rendering package for creating realistically
   shaded walkthroughs from Lightscape Graphics Software. This product
   runs on high end workstations and is aimed primarily at architects and
   lighting designers.
   
   
   
   There have been a number of other packages introduced recently for
   professional VR development. I do not have full information on all of
   them and suggest the interested reader follow up by reading either the
   AI Expert Special Report on Virtual Reality or perhaps by purchasing
   Sophistech's VR Sourcebook.
   
I.5. Aspects of A VR Program

   
   
   Just what is required of a VR program? The basic parts of the system
   can be broken down into an Input Processor, a Simulation Processor, a
   Rendering Process, and a World Database. All these parts must consider
   the time required for processing. Every delay in response time
   degrades the feeling of 'presence' and reality of the simulation.
   
  I.5.1. INPUT PROCESSES
  
   
   
   The Input Processes of a VR program control the devices used to input
   information to the computer. There are a wide variety of possible
   input devices: keyboard, mouse, trackball, joystick, 3D & 6D position
   trackers (glove, wand, head tracker, body suit, etc.). A networked VR
   system would add inputs received from net. A voice recognition system
   is also a good augmentation for VR, especially if the user's hands are
   being used for other tasks. Generally, the input processing of a VR
   system is kept simple. The object is to get the coordinate data to the
   rest of the system with minimal lag time. Some position sensor systems
   add some filtering and data smoothing processing. Some glove systems
   add gesture recognition. This processing step examines the glove
   inputs and determines when a specific gesture has been made. Thus it
   can provide a higher level of input to the simulation.
   
  I.5.2. SIMULATION PROCESS
  
   
   
   The core of a VR program is the simulation system. This is the process
   that knows about the objects and the various inputs. It handles the
   interactions, the scripted object actions, simulations of physical
   laws (real or imaginary) and determines the world status. This
   simulation is basically a discrete process that is iterated once for
   each time step or frame. A networked VR application may have multiple
   simulations running on different machines, each with a different time
   step. Coordination of these can be a complex task.
   
   
   
   It is the simulation engine that takes the user inputs along with any
   tasks programmed into the world such as collision detection, scripts,
   etc. and determines the actions that will take place in the virtual
   world.
   
  I.5.3. RENDERING PROCESSES
  
   
   
   The Rendering Processes of a VR program are those that create the
   sensations that are output to the user. A network VR program would
   also output data to other network processes. There would be separate
   rendering processes for visual, auditory, haptic (touch/force), and
   other sensory systems. Each renderer would take a description of the
   world state from the simulation process or derive it directly from the
   World Database for each time step.
   
    I.5.3.1. Visual Renderer
    
   
   
   The visual renderer is the most common process and it has a long
   history from the world of computer graphics and animation. The reader
   is encouraged to become familiar with various aspects of this
   technology.
   
   
   
   The major consideration of a graphic renderer for VR applications is
   the frame generation rate. It is necessary to create a new frame every
   1/20 of a second or faster. 20 frames per second (fps) is roughly the
   minimum rate at which the human brain will merge a stream of still
   images and perceive a smooth animation. 24fps is the standard rate for
   film, 25fps is PAL TV, 30fps is NTSC TV. 60fps is Showscan film rate.
   This requirement eliminates a number of rendering techniques such as
   raytracing and radiosity. These techniques can generate very realistic
   images but often take hours to generate single frames.
   
   
   
   Visual renderers for VR use other methods such as a 'painter's
   algorithm', a Z-Buffer, or other Scanline oriented algorithm. There
   are many areas of visual rendering that have been augmented with
   specialized hardware. The Painter's algorithm is favored by many low
   end VR systems since it is relatively fast, easy to implement and
   light on memory resources. However, it has many visibility problems.
   For a discussion of this and other rendering algorithms, see one of
   the computer graphics reference books listed in a later section.
   
   
   
   The visual rendering process is often referred to as a rendering
   pipeline. This refers to the series of sub-processes that are invoked
   to create each frame. A sample rendering pipeline starts with a
   description of the world, the objects, lighting and camera (eye)
   location in world space. A first step would be eliminate all objects
   that are not visible by the camera. This can be quickly done by
   clipping the object bounding box or sphere against the viewing pyramid
   of the camera. Then the remaining objects have their geometry's
   transformed into the eye coordinate system (eye point at origin). Then
   the hidden surface algorithm and actual pixel rendering is done.
   
   
   
   The pixel rendering is also known as the 'lighting' or 'shading'
   algorithm. There are a number of different methods that are possible
   depending on the realism and calculation speed available. The simplest
   method is called flat shading and simply fills the entire area with
   the same color. The next step up provides some variation in color
   across a single surface. Beyond that is the possibility of smooth
   shading across surface boundaries, adding highlights, reflections,
   etc.
   
   
   
   An effective short cut for visual rendering is the use of "texture" or
   "image" maps. These are pictures that are mapped onto objects in the
   virtual world. Instead of calculating lighting and shading for the
   object, the renderer determines which part of the texture map is
   visible at each visible point of the object. The resulting image
   appears to have significantly more detail than is otherwise possible.
   Some VR systems have special 'billboard' objects that always face
   towards the user. By mapping a series of different images onto the
   billboard, the user can get the appearance of moving around the
   object.
   
   
   
   I need to correct my earlier statement that radiosity cannot be used
   for VR systems due to the time requirements. There have recently been
   at least two radiosity renderers announced for walkthrough type
   systems - Lightscape from Lightscape Graphics Software of Canada and
   Real Light from Atma Systems of Italy. These packages compute the
   radiosity lighting in a long time consuming process before hand. The
   user can interactively control the camera view but cannot interact
   with the world. An executable demo of the Atma product is available
   for SGI systems from ftp.iunet.it (192.106.1.6) in the directory
   ftp/vendor/Atma.
   
    I.5.3.2. Auditory Rendering
    
   
   
   A VR system is greatly enhanced by the inclusion of an audio
   component. This may produce mono, stereo or 3D audio. The latter is a
   fairly difficult proposition. It is not enough to do stereo-pan
   effects as the mind tends to locate these sounds inside the head.
   Research into 3D audio has shown that there are many aspects of our
   head and ear shape that effect the recognition of 3D sounds. It is
   possible to apply a rather complex mathematical function (called a
   Head Related Transfer Function or HRTF) to a sound to produce this
   effect. The HRTF is a very personal function that depends on the
   individual's ear shape, etc. However, there has been significant
   success in creating generalized HRTFs that work for most people and
   most audio placement. There remains a number of problems, such as the
   'cone of confusion' wherein sounds behind the head are perceived to be
   in front of the head.
   
   
   
   Sound has also been suggested as a means to convey other information,
   such as surface roughness. Dragging your virtual hand over sand would
   sound different than dragging it through gravel.
   
    I.5.3.3. Haptic Rendering
    
   
   
   Haptics is the generation of touch and force feedback information.
   This area is a very new science and there is much to be learned. There
   have been very few studies done on the rendering of true touch sense
   (such as liquid, fur, etc.). Almost all systems to date have focused
   on force feedback and kinesthetic senses. These systems can provide
   good clues to the body regarding the touch sense, but are considered
   distinct from it. Many of the haptic systems thus far have been
   exo-skeletons that can be used for position sensing as well as
   providing resistance to movement or active force application.
   
    I.5.3.4. Other Senses
    
   
   
   The sense of balance and motion can be served to a fair degree in a VR
   system by a motion platform. These are used in flight simulators and
   some theaters to provide some motion cues that the mind integrates
   with other cues to perceive motion. It is not necessary to recreate
   the entire motion perfectly to fool the mind into a willing suspension
   of disbelief.
   
   
   
   The sense of temperature has seen some technology developments. There
   exist very small electrical heat pumps that can produce the sensation
   of heat and cold in a localized area. These system are fairly
   expensive.
   
   
   
   Other senses such as taste, smell, pheromone, etc. are beyond our
   ability to render rapidly and effectively. Sometimes, we just don't
   know enough about the functioning of these other senses.
   
I.6. World Space

   
   
   The virtual world itself needs to be defined in a 'world space'. By
   its nature as a computer simulation, this world is necessarily
   limited. The computer must put a numeric value on the locations of
   each point of each object within the world. Usually these
   'coordinates' are expressed in Cartesian dimensions of X, Y, and Z
   (length, height, depth). It is possible to use alternative coordinate
   systems such as spherical but Cartesian coordinates are the norm for
   almost all applications. Conversions between coordinate systems are
   fairly simple (if time consuming).
   
  I.6.1. WORLD COORDINATES
  
   
   
   A major limitation on the world space is the type of numbers used for
   the coordinates. Some worlds use floating point coordinates. This
   allows a very large range of numbers to be specified, with some
   precision lost on large numbers. Other systems used fixed point
   coordinates, which provides uniform precision on a more limited range
   of values. The choice of fixed versus floating point is often based on
   speed as well as the desire for a uniform coordinate field.
   
  I.6.2. A WORLD DIVIDED: SEPARATION OF ENVIRONMENTS
  
   
   
   One method of dealing with the limitations on the world coordinate
   space is to divide a virtual world up into multiple worlds and provide
   a means of transiting between the worlds. This allows fewer objects to
   be computed both for scripts and for rendering. There should be
   multiple stages (aka rooms, areas, zones, worlds, multiverses, etc.)
   and a way to move between them (Portals).
   
I.7. World Database

   
   
   The storage of information on objects and the world is a major part of
   the design of a VR system. The primary things that are stored in the
   World Database (or World Description Files) are the objects that
   inhabit the world, scripts that describe actions of those objects or
   the user (things that happen to the user), lighting, program controls,
   and hardware device support.
   
  I.7.1. STORAGE METHODS
  
   
   
   There are a number of different ways the world information may be
   stored: a single file, a collection of files, or a database. The
   multiple file method is one of the more common approaches for VR
   development packages. Each object has one or more files (geometry,
   scripts, etc.) and there is some overall 'world' file that causes the
   other files to be loaded. Some systems also include a configuration
   file that defines the hardware interface connections.
   
   
   
   Sometimes the entire database is loaded during program startup, other
   systems only read the currently needed files. A real database system
   helps tremendously with the latter approach. An Object Oriented
   Database would be a great fit for a VR system, but I am not aware of
   any projects currently using one.
   
   
   
   The data files are most often stored as ASCII (human readable) text
   files. However, in many systems these are replaced by binary computer
   files. Some systems have all the world information compiled directly
   into the application.
   
  I.7.2. OBJECTS
  
   
   
   Objects in the virtual world can have geometry, hierarchy, scripts,
   and other attributes. The capabilities of objects has a tremendous
   impact on the structure and design of the system. In order to retain
   flexibility, a list of named attribute/values pairs is often used.
   Thus attributes can be added to the system without requiring changes
   to the object data structures.
   
   
   
   These attribute lists would be addressable by name (i.e. cube.mass =>
   mass of the cube object). They may be a scalar, vector, or expression
   value. They may be addressable from within the scripts of their
   object. They might be accessible from scripts in other objects.
   
    I.7.2.1. Position/Orientable
    
   
   
   An object is positionable and orientable. That is, it has a location
   and orientation in space. Most objects can have these attributes
   modified by applying translation and rotation operations. These
   operations are often implemented using methods from vector and matrix
   algebra.
   
    I.7.2.2. Hierarchy
    
   
   
   An object may be part of an object part HIERARCHY with a parent,
   sibling, and child objects. Such an object would inherit the
   transformations applied to it's parent object and pass these on to
   it's siblings and children. Hierarchies are used to create jointed
   figures such as robots and animals. They can also be used to model
   other things like the sun,  planets and moons in a solar system.
   
    I.7.2.3. Bounding Volume
    
   
   
   Additionally, an object should include a BOUNDING VOLUME. The simplest
   bounding volume is the Bounding Sphere, specified by a center and
   radius. Another simple alternative is the Bounding Cube. This data can
   be used for rapid object culling during rendering and trigger
   analysis. Objects whose bounding volume is completely outside the
   viewing area need not be transformed or considered further during
   rendering. Collision detection with bounding spheres is very rapid. It
   could be used alone, or as a method for culling objects before more
   rigorous collision detection algorithms are applied.
   
  I.7.3. OBJECT GEOMETRY
  
   
   
   The modeling of object shape and geometry is a large and diverse
   field. Some approaches seek to very carefully model the exact geometry
   of real world objects. Other methods seek to create simplified
   representations. Most VR systems sacrifice detail and exactness for
   simplicity for the sake of rendering speed.
   
   
   
   The simplest objects are single dimensional points. Next come the two
   dimensional vectors. Many CAD systems create and exchange data as 2D
   views. This information is not very useful for VR systems, except for
   display on a 2D surface within the virtual world. There are some
   programs that can reconstruct a 3D model of an object, given a number
   of 2D views.
   
   
   
   The sections below discuss a number of common geometric modeling
   methods. The choice of method used is closely tied to the rendering
   process used. Some renderers can handle multiple types of models, but
   most use only one, especially for VR use. The modeling complexity is
   generally inversely proportional to the rendering speed. As the model
   gets more complex and detailed, the frame rate drops.
   
    I.7.3.1. 3D PolyLines & PolyPoints
    
   
   
   The simplest 3D objects are known as PolyPoints and PolyLines. A
   PolyPoint is simply a collection of points in space. A Polyline is a
   set of vectors that form a continuous line.
   
    I.7.3.2. Polygons
    
   
   
   The most common form of objects used in VR systems are based on flat
   polygons. A polygon is a planar, closed multi-sided figure. They maybe
   convex or concave, but some systems require convex polygons. The use
   of polygons often gives objects a faceted look. This can be offset by
   more advanced rendering techniques such as the use of smooth shading
   and texture mapping.
   
   
   
   Some systems use simple triangles or quadrilaterals instead of more
   general polygons. This can simplify the rendering process, as all
   surfaces have a known shape. However, it can also increase the number
   of surfaces that need to be rendered.
   
   
   
   Polygon Mesh Format (aka Vertex Join Set) is a useful form of
   polygonal object. For each object in a Mesh, there is a common pool of
   Points that are referenced by the polygons for that object.
   Transforming these shared points reduces the calculations needed to
   render the object. A point at the edge of a cube is only processed
   once, rather once for each of the three edge/polygons that reference
   it. The PLG format used by REND386 is an example of a Polygonal Mesh,
   as is the BYU format used by the 'ancient' MOVIE.BYU program.)
   
   
   
   . The geometry format can support precomputed polygon and vertex
   normals. Both Polygons and vertices should be allowed a color
   attribute. Different renderers may use or ignore these and possibly
   more advanced surface characteristics. Precomputed polygon normals are
   very helpful for backface polygon removal. Vertices may also have
   texture coordinates assigned to support texture or other image mapping
   techniques.
   
    I.7.3.3. Primitives
    
   
   
   Some systems provide only Primitive Objects, such as cubes, cones, and
   spheres. Sometimes, these objects can be slightly deformed by the
   modeling package to provide more interesting objects.
   
    I.7.3.4. Solid Modeling & Boolean Operations
    
   
   
   Solid Modeling (aka Computer Solid Geometry, CSG) is one form of
   geometric modeling that uses primitive objects. It extends the concept
   by allowing various addition, subtraction, Boolean and other
   operations between these primitives. This can be very useful in
   modeling objects when you are concerned with doing physical
   calculations, such as center of mass, etc. However, this method does
   incur some significant calculations and is not very useful for VR
   applications. It is possible to convert a CSG model into polygons.
   Various complexity polygonal models (# polygons) could be made from a
   single high resolution ''metaobject" of a CSG type.
   
    I.7.3.5. Curves & Patches
    
   
   
   Another advanced form of geometric modeling is the use of curves and
   curved surfaces (aka patches). These can be very effective in
   representing complex shapes, like the curved surface of an automobile,
   ship or beer bottle. However, there is significant calculation
   involved in determining the surface location at each pixel, thus curve
   based modeling is not used directly in VR systems. It is possible,
   however, to design an object using curves and then compute a polygonal
   representation of those curved patches. Various complexity polygonal
   models could be made from a single high resolution 'metaobject'.
   
    I.7.3.6. Dynamic Geometry (aka morphing)
    
   
   
   It is sometimes desirable to have an object that can change shape. The
   shape might simply be deformed, such a bouncing ball or the
   squash/stretch used in classical animation ('toons'), or it might
   actually undergo metamorphosis into a completely different geometry.
   The latter effect is commonly known as 'morphing' and has been
   extensively used in films, commercials and television shows. Morphing
   can be done in the image domain (2D morph) or in the geometry domain
   (3D morph). The latter is applicable to VR systems. The simplest
   method of doing a 3D morph is to precompute the various geometry's and
   step through them as needed. A system with significant processing
   power can handle real time object morphing.
   
    I.7.3.7. Swept Objects & Surface of Revolution
    
   
   
   A common method for creating objects is known as Sweeping and Surfaces
   of Revolution. These methods use an outline or template curve and a
   backbone. The template is swept along the backbone creating the object
   surface (or rotated about a single axis to create a surface of
   revolution). This method may be used to create either curve surfaces
   or polygonal objects. For VR applications, the sweeping would most
   likely be performed during the object modeling (creation) phase, and
   the resulting polygonal object stored for real time use.
   
    I.7.3.8. Texture Maps & Billboard Objects
    
   
   
   As mentioned in the section on rendering, texture maps (images) can be
   used to provide the appearance of more geometric complexity without
   the geometric calculations. Using flat polygonal objects that maintain
   an orientation towards the eye/camera (billboards) and multiple
   texture maps can extend this trick even further. Texture maps, even
   without billboard objects, are an excellent way to increase apparent
   scene complexity. Variations on the image mapping concept are also
   used to simulate reflections, etc.
   
  I.7.4. LIGHTS
  
   
   
   Lighting is a very important part of a virtual world (if it is
   visually rendered). Lights can be ambient (everywhere), or located.
   Located lights have position and may have orientation, color,
   intensity and a cone of illumination. The more complex the light
   source, the more computation is required to simulate its effect on
   objects.
   
  I.7.5. CAMERAS
  
   
   
   Cameras or viewpoints may be described in the World Database.
   Generally, each user has only one viewpoint at a time (ok, two closely
   spaced viewpoints for stereoscopic systems). However, it may be useful
   to define alternative cameras that can be used as needed. An example
   might be an overhead camera that shows a schematic map of the virtual
   world and the user's location within it (You Are Here.)
   
  I.7.6. SCRIPTS AND OBJECT BEHAVIOR
  
   
   
   A virtual world consisting only of static objects is only of mild
   interest. Many researchers and enthusiasts of VR have remarked that
   interaction is the key to a successful and interesting virtual world.
   This requires some means of defining the actions that objects take on
   their own and when the user (or other objects) interact with them.
   This i refer to generically as the World Scripting. I divide the
   scripts into three basic types: Motion Scripts, Trigger Scripts and
   Connection Scripts
   
   
   
   Scripts may be textual or they might be actually compiled into the
   program structure. The use of visual programming languages for world
   design was pioneered by VPL Research with their Body Electric system.
   This Macintosh based language used 2d blocks on the screen to
   represent inputs, objects and functions. The programmer would connect
   the boxes to indicate data flow.
   
   
   
   There is no common scripting language used in today's VR products. The
   commercial authoring packages, such as VR Studio, VREAM and Superscape
   all contain some form of scripting language. Autodesk's CDK has the
   "Cyberspace Description Format" (CDF) and the Distributed Shared
   Cyberspace Virtual Representation (DSCVR) database. These are only
   partially implemented in the current release. They are derived from
   the Linda distributed programming language/database system.
   ("Coordiantation Languages and their Significance", David Gelernter
   and Nicholas Carriero, Communications of the ACM, Feb 1992 V35N2). On
   the homebrew/freeware side, some people are experimenting with several
   Object Oriented interpretive languages such as BOB ("Your own tiny
   Object-Oriented Language", David Betz, DrDobbs Journal Sept 1991).
   Object Orientation, although perhaps not in the conventional
   class-inheritance mechanism, is very nicely suited to world scripting.
   Interpretive langauges are faster for development, and often more
   accessible to 'non-programmers'.
   
    I.7.6.1. Motion Scripts
    
   
   
   Motion scripts modify the position, orientation or other attributes of
   an object, light or camera based on the current system tick. A 'tick'
   is one advancement of the simulation clock. Generally, this is
   equivalent to a single frame of visual animation. (VR generally uses
   Discrete Simulation methods)
   
   
   
   For simplicity and speed, only one motion script should be active for
   an object at any one instant. Motion scripting is a potentially
   powerful feature, depending on how complex we allow these scripts to
   become. Care must be exercised since the interpretation of these
   scripts will require time, which impacts the frame and delay rates.
   
   
   
   Additionally, a script might be used to attach or detach an object
   from a hierarchy. For example, a script might attach the user to a CAR
   object when he wishes to drive around the virtual world.
   Alternatively, the user might 'pick up' or attach an object to
   himself.
   
    I.7.6.2. Physical or Procedural Modeling and Simulation
    
   
   
   A complex simulation could be used that models the interactions of the
   real physical world. This is sometimes referred to as Procedural
   Modeling. It can be a very complex and time consuming application. The
   mathematics required to solve the physical interaction equations can
   also be fairly complex. However, this method can provide a very
   realistic interaction mechanism. (for more on Physical Simulation, see
   the book by Ronen Barzel listed in the Computer Graphics Books
   section)
   
    I.7.6.3. Simple Animation
    
   
   
   A simpler method of animation is to use simple formulas for the motion
   of objects. A very simple example would be "Rotate about Z axis once
   every 4 seconds". This might also be represented as "Rotate about Z 10
   radians each frame".
   
   
   
   A slightly more advanced method of animation is to provide a 'path'
   for the object with controls on its speed at various points. These
   controls are sometimes referred to as "slow in-out". They provide a
   much more realistic motion than simple linear motion.
   
   
   
   If the motion is fixed, some systems can precompute the motion and
   provide a 'channel' of data that is evaluated at each time instance.
   This may be a simple lookup table with exact values for each frame, or
   it may require some sort of simple interpolation.
   
    I.7.6.4. Trigger Scripts
    
   
   
   Trigger Scripts are invoked when some trigger event occurs, such as
   collision, proximity or selection. The VR system needs to evaluate the
   trigger parameters at each TICK. For proximity detectors, this may be
   a simple distance check from the object to the 3D eye or effector
   object (aka virtual human) Collision detection is a more involved
   process. It is desirable but may not be practical without off loading
   the rendering and some UI tasks from the main processor.
   
    I.7.6.5. Connection Scripts
    
   
   
   Connection scripts control the connection of input and output devices
   to various objects. For example a connection script may be used to
   connect a glove device to a virtual hand object. The glove movements
   and position information is used to control the position and actions
   of the hand object in the virtual world. Some systems build this
   function directly into the program. Other systems are designed such
   that the VR program is almost entirely a connection script.
   
  I.7.7. INTERACTION FEEDBACK
  
   
   
   The user must be given some indication of interaction feedback when
   the virtual cursor selects or touches an object. Crude systems have
   only the visual feedback of seeing the cursor (virtual hand) penetrate
   an object. The user can then grasp or otherwise select the object. The
   selected object is then highlighted in some manner. Alternatively, an
   audio signal could be generated to indicate a collision. Some systems
   use simple touch feedback, such as a vibration in the joystick, to
   indicate collision, etc.
   
  I.7.8. GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE/CONTROL PANELS
  
   
   
   A VR system often needs to have some sort of control panels available
   to the user. The world database may contain information on these
   panels and how they are integrated into the application.
   Alternatively, they may be a part of the program code.
   
   
   
   There are several ways to create these panels. There could be 2D menus
   that surround a WoW display, or are overlaid onto the image. An
   alternative is to place control devices inside the virtual world. The
   simulation system must then note user interaction with these devices
   as providing control over the world.
   
   
   
   One primary area of user control is control of the viewpoint (moving
   around within the virtual world). Some systems use the joystick or
   similar device to move. Others use gestures from a glove, such as
   pointing, to indicate a motion command.
   
   
   
   The user interface to the VW might be restricted to direct interaction
   in the 3D world. However, this is extremely limiting and requires lots
   of 3D calculations. Thus it is desirable to have some form of 2D
   Graphical user interface to assist in controlling the virtual world.
   These 'control panels' of the would appear to occlude portions of the
   3D world, or perhaps the 3D world would appear as a window or viewport
   set in a 2D screen interface. The 2D interactions could also be
   represented as a flat panel floating in 3D space, with a 3D effector
   controlling them.
   
    I.7.8.1. Two Dimensional Controls
    
   
   
   There are four primary types of 2D controls and displays. (controls
   cause changes in the virtual world, displays show some measurement on
   the VW.) Buttons, Sliders, Gauges and Text. Buttons may be menu items
   with either icons or text identifiers. Sliders are used for more
   analog control over various attributes. A variation of a slider is the
   dial, but these are harder to implement as 2D controls. Gauges are
   graphical depiction's of the value of some attribute(s) of the world.
   Text may be used for both control and display. The user might enter
   text commands to some command parser. The system may use text displays
   to show the various attributes of the virtual world.
   
   
   
   An additional type of 2D display might be a map or locator display.
   This would provide a point of reference for navigating the virtual
   world.
   
   
   
   The VR system needs a definition for how the 2D cursor effects these
   areas. It may be desirable to have a notion of a 'current control'
   that is the focus of the activity (button pressed, etc.) for the 2D
   effector. Perhaps the arrow keys on the keyboard could be used to
   change the current control, instead of using the mouse (which might be
   part of the 3D effector at present).
   
    I.7.8.2. Three Dimensional Controls
    
   
   
   Some systems place the controls inside the virtual world. These are
   often implemented as a floating control panel object. This panel
   contains the usual 2D buttons, gauges, menu items, etc. perhaps with a
   3D representation and interaction style.
   
   
   
   There have also been some published articles on 3D control Widgets.
   These are interaction methods for directly controlling the 3D objects.
   One method implemented at Brown University attaches control handles to
   the objects. These handles can be grasped, moved, twisted, etc. to
   cause various effects on an object. For example, twisting one handle
   might rotate the object, while a 'rack' widget would provide a number
   of handles that can be used to deform the object by twisting its
   geometry.
   
  I.7.9. HARDWARE CONTROL & CONNECTIONS
  
   
   
   The world database may contain information on the hardware controls
   and how they are integrated into the application. Alternatively, they
   may be a part of the program code. Some VR systems put this
   information into a configuration file. I consider this extra file
   simply another part of the world database.
   
   
   
   The hardware mapping section would define the input/output ports, data
   speeds, and other parameters for each device. It would also provide
   for the logical connection of that device to some part of the virtual
   world. For example a position tracker might be associated with the
   viewer's head or hand.
   
  I.7.10. ROOM/STAGE/AREA DESCRIPTIONS
  
   
   
   If the system supports the division of the virtual world into
   different areas, the world database would need multiple scene
   descriptions. Each area description would give the names of objects in
   scene, stage description (i.e. size, backgrounds, lighting, etc.).
   There would also be some method of moving between the worlds, such as
   entering a doorway, etc., that would most likely be expressed in
   object scripts.
   
I.8. World Authoring versus Playback

   
   
   A virtual world can be created, modified and experienced. Some VR
   systems may not distinguish between the creation and experiencing
   aspects. However, there is currently a much larger body of experience
   to draw upon for designing the world from the outside. This method may
   use techniques borrowed from architectural and other forms of Computer
   Aided Design (CAD) systems. Also the current technologies for
   immersive VR systems are fairly limiting in resolution, latency, etc.
   They are not nearly as well developed as those for more conventional
   computer graphics and interfaces.
   
   
   
   For many VR systems, it makes a great deal of sense to have a
   Authoring mode and a Playback mode. The authoring mode may be a
   standard text editor and compiler system, or it may include 3D graphic
   and other tools. Such a split mode system makes it easier to create a
   stand alone application that can be delivered as a product.
   
   
   
   An immersive authoring ability may be desirable for some applications
   and some users. For example, an architect might have the ability to
   move walls, etc. when immersed, while the clients with him, who are
   not as familiar with the system, are limited to player status. That
   way they can't accidentally rearrange the house by leaning on a wall.
   
                         II. VR INFORMATION RESOURCES
                                       
   
   
   The following information is provided to direct the interested reader
   to more information on virtual reality. It is not a complete listing
   of all sources. Many of the VR reference books listed below contain
   resource listings that have more complete descriptions of some of the
   products and services offered.
   
   
   
   Toni Emerson of the HITL has put together a more extensive list of
   resources. Her list can be found on the ftp site ftp.u.washington.edu
   in the directory public/Virtual-Reality/HITL/reports. Look for
   irvr.txt and any emerson.... documents. At this writing the most
   current is emerson.B.93.2.txt. I have borrowed liberally from Toni's
   list. I hope she will forgive me. Toni's report is far more likely to
   be updated in the future than this document.
   
   
   
   Bill Cockayne maintains an very good listing of on-line services,
   newsgroups, etc. as vr_sites.txt on ftp.apple.com.
   
   
   
   There are several commercial services that provide much more extensive
   listings of VR resources. The one that I have found to be the most
   extensive is Sophistech's VR Sourcebook. This is available both in
   printed and electronic form.
   
II.1. NewsGroups and Mailing Lists

   
   
   There are two different styles of group communication on. First there
   are the News Groups, which were originally part of Usenet. These are
   distributed to news repositories on the various host systems and are
   browsed and replyed to via a news reader. Details of news access vary
   between systems. Contact your local system administrators for
   information on methods available to you. Second, there are the mail
   lists services automatically by 'list servers' (aka listserv). These
   distribute their contents via email directly to the mailbox of the
   individual subscribers.
   
   
   
   Subscribing to a mail list requires sending an email message to either
   an individual or an automated list-server service. Generally, the
   list-servers note your email address from the mail header and read the
   body of the message for special commands. The one you want is
   "subscibe <listname> <your full name>". Replacing <listname> with the
   name of the newslist you want and <your full name> with your *real*
   name, not your login name.
   
  II.1.1. SOME RECOMMENDED USENET GROUPS:
  
   
   
   comp.graphics
   
   comp.graphics.visualization
   
   comp.graphics.digest
   
   comp.research.japan
   
   comp.robotics
   
   comp.simulation
   
   alt.cyberpunk and alt.cyberpunk.tech often concerns topics related to
   VR,
   
   though that is not the focus of the discussions themselves.
   
   alt.cyberspace has pretty light-hearted discussions on the present and
   
   
   future implementation of cyberspace in the world.
   
  II.1.2. VR NEWS GROUPS WITH MAIL LIST ECHOS
  
   
   
   The following two news groups are directly aimed at the VR community
   and are also available as mail list echos.
   
   
   
   Sci.virutal-worlds (aka: virtu-l) Moderated by Toni Emerson, Aaron
   Pulkka and Michael Almquist (Human Interface Technology Lab Moderating
   Group). Send a mail message to
   
   listserv@uiucvmd.bitnet
   
   with a body of
   
   subscribe virtu-l <full_name>
   
   Moderator: gbnewby@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.(Greg Newby)
   
   
   
   Sci.virtual-worlds.apps (aka: vrapp-l) co-moderated by Bob Jacobson
   and Mark DeLoura. Send a mail message to:
   
   listserv@uiucvmd.bitnet
   
   with a body of
   
   subscribe vrapp-l <full_name>
   
  II.1.3. MAILING LISTS
  
   
   
   Glove-list: Subscribe by sending an email message to
   
   listserv@boxer.nas.nasa.gov
   
   with a body of
   
   subscribe glove-list <your full name, not login id>
   
   Post to: glove-list@winn30.nas.nasa.gov
   
   Moderator: jet@boxer.nas.nasa.gov
   
   
   
   Head-Trackers mailing list: Subscribe by sending e-mail to
   
   trackers-request@qucis.queensu.ca
   
   with an informal request (not handled by automated system)
   
   post to: trackers@qucis.queensu.ca
   
   
   
   REND386 : two mail lists, one for announcements and one for general
   discussions. Subscribe by sending an email message to
   
   Majordomo@sunee.uwaterloo.ca
   
   with a body of either or both of the following lines:
   
   
   
   subscribe rend386-announce
   
   subscribe rend386-discuss
   
   Moderated by the creators of REND386 - Dave Stampe and Bernie Roehl
   
   
   
   Iris On-Line: based on the SGI monthly news magazine. To subscribe,
   email:
   
   list-manager@sgi.comm
   
   with a body of
   
   subscribe nyn-emag
   
   
   
   VIGIS-L: discussion of uses of VR interfacces for Geographic
   Information Systems (GIS) and spatial information support systems.
   Moderator: Thomas Edwards. To subscribe email:
   
   listserv@uwavm.bitnet
   
   with a body of
   
   Subscribe VIGIS-L (yourname)
   
   
   
   Amiga VR list: Administerd by Ethan Dicks <erd@kumiss.cmhnet.org> To
   subscribe send a message to
   
   listserv@kumiss.cmhnet.org
   
   with a body of
   
   "subscribe amigavr-list <your first name> <your last name>".
   
   
   
   DIS-List: information on the Distributed Interactive Simulation
   protocol and NPS software impementation. Send an mail message
   requesting to be added to the list to:
   
   dis-maint@taurus.cs.nps.navy.mil
   
II.2. Internet FTP Sites

  II.2.1. SITES IN THE NORTH AMERICA
  
   
   
   ftp.u.washingon.edu public/virtual-worlds (home of sci.virtual-worlds)
   and public/Virtual-Reality (HITLab archives)
   
   
   
   stein.u.washingon.edu - alternative to ftp.u.washingon.edu
   
   
   
   sunee.uwaterloo.ca (129.97.50.50) (home of REND386 (freeware VR
   library/package)
   
   
   
   ftp.apple.com (130.43.2.3) (sites list, Macintosh VR, CAD projects
   info)
   
   
   
   taurus.cs.nps.navy.mil: (Info on DIS and NPSNET, including C library)
   
   
   
   avalon.chinalake.navy.mil (129.131.31.11) (lots of geometry files)
   
   
   
   wuarchive.wustl.edu (128.252.135.4) mirror stein VR, usenet archive
   
   
   
   sunsite.unc.edu (152.2.22.81)
   /pub/academic/computer-science/virtual-reality (virtual reality demos,
   iris info, glasses, mirrors some of stein.u.washington.edu, uforce
   info )
   
   
   
   world.std.com bcs/vr (Boston Computer Society's VR area)
   
   
   
   ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu (USA, supercomputer center really high end VR) in
   the ./VR area
   
   
   
   src.doc.ic.ac.uk (146.169.2.1) (usenet archive /usenet...)
   
   
   
   mom.spie.org International Society for Optical Engineering
   
   
   
   conf4.darpa.mil (192.160.51.7) info on ALSP a high level battle
   simulation protocol in alsp/doc
   
  II.2.2. OVERSEAS FTP SITES
  
   
   
   ftp.ipa.fhg.de (Germany)
   
   
   
   wench.eco.jcu.edu.au /pub/sega - LC glasses info
   
   
   
   tauon.ph.uimelb.edu.au pub/papers/galilean (real time rendering
   hardware)
   
   
   
   ftp.iunet.it ftp/vender/Atma Real Light radiosity renderer demo & info
   
   
   
   eta.lut.ac.uk (158.125.96.29) UK-VR-SIG ftp archive. check out
   public/pc/swoopvr.zip
   
II.3. On-line Services & BBS

   
   
   There are many computer bulletin boards and on-line services that
   support VR discussion and development. I am personally involved on
   several. My email address is given at the beginning of this paper.
   
   
   
   I am the sysop of the CompuServe CyberForum (Go CyberF). This is one
   of the most active online discussions and the libraries contain a
   large number of VR programs, demos, concept papers, and an
   (incomplete) echo of the sci.virtual-worlds news group. For
   information on CompuServe, call (800)848-8990 or (614) 457-8650
   
   
   
   The WELL (Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link) has a VR discussion area (GO
   VR). For information on joining The WELL, call(415) 332-4335 or modem
   (415)332-6106. You can also telnet into the well as 'well.sf.ca.us'
   and sign on as newuser.
   
   
   
   The Byte Information Exchange (BIX) has a conference on VR: join
   virtual.world. To join BIX, call 1-800-695-4882 (2400 Baud, No Parity,
   8 data, 1 stop bit). BIX is also available via telnet as
   'x25.bix.com', and enter "BIX" at the first user name prompt.
   
   
   
   America On-line reportedly also has a VR section. "VIRTUS" - virtual
   reality conference hosted by Virtus Corp. To find contact AOL, call
   1-800-827-6364. They might ask for an extension #, try 5894
   
   
   
   GENIE has a VR discussion and partial echos of sci.virtual-worlds on
   the Space and Science Roundtable and also the Radio and Electronics
   Round Table. Contact J Randall Severy - (GEnie: RSEVERY, CompuServe:
   76166,3477, Internet: ge!severy@uunet.uu.net) (Info on joining
   GENIE???)
   
   
   
   The Diaspar VR Network is a BBS dedicated to VR. Diaspar includes a
   number of 'VNET' or virtual BBS subsystems that are run by other
   individuals. Sense8 has one VNET on Diaspar that is used for their
   customer support. There are also some interactive multiperson 3D
   programs available on Diaspar, most notably the chess game "Mate" from
   VRontier Worlds. Diaspar can be reached at (714) 831-1776 (voice),
   9600 Baud: 714-376-1234, 1200 Baud: 714-376-1200. Diaspar is available
   from Internet sites via Telnet as diaspar.com (192.215.11.1) It is
   also available from the PC Pursuit long distance network -
   800.736.1130. On first login use the name "Diaspar" (be sure to use
   capital D and lowercase iaspar.) This gets you to the BBS login area
   and you can get set up with your username and password.
   
   
   
   The AMULET BBS (Santa Monica, CA). Data access: (310)453-7705.
   
   
   
   SENSE/NET (801) 364-6227 (Salt Lake City, Utah) (I have not been able
   to successfully connect with this BBS)
   
   
   
   Zarno BBS at (706) 860-2927 (Atlanta GA), carries RIME, an
   international mail system that is used on many BBS's and which has
   recently started a VR conference. (also threads in C and CAD rime
   networks)
   
   
   
   Colton, CA BBS with the RIME echo...The number is (909) 783-7802
   
   
   
   Toronto Virtual Reality SIG BBS(416) 631-6625, 16.8K baud. I
   
   
   
   Virtual Space Driver [MD] (301) 424-9133
   
   
   
   VRontier Worlds BBS [WI] 608-873-8523 (6pm-7am CST weekdays, 24hrs on
   weekends) Includes the electronic home of PCVR magazine. Note that
   this is a business voice line during the day.
   
   
   
   Houston Game Designer BBS [TX]713-251-0734
   
   
   
   Hacker-Art (Italy) 39-55-485997
   
II.4. Local VR Interest Groups

   
   
   This section provides a listing of local and (some) national VR
   interest groups. Many of these have regular meetings with invited
   speakers and presentations. They are one of the best ways to get to
   know other people involved in VR in your area.
   
  II.4.1. GROUPS IN USA
  
   
   
   Los Angeles VRSIG: contact Virtual Ventures/Dave Blackburn, 1300 The
   Strand, Suite A, Manhattan Beach, CA 90266 Voice:(310) 545-0369 email:
   breeder@well.sf.ca.us (I am a member of this group, which meets at the
   Electronic Cafe International on 18th Street, Santa Monica, CA)
   
   
   
   Chicago VRSIG: c/o Nina Adams, 3952 Western Ave, Western Springs,
   Chicago, IL 60558, Voice: (708)246-0766 email:
   71052.1373@compuserve.com
   
   
   
   San Francisco VR Group, Contact Linda Jacobson, Verge (Virtual Reality
   Group), 16050 Kings Creek Rd., Boulder Creek, CA 95006; Voice:
   415-826-4716. email:lindaj@well.sf.ca.us
   
   
   
   Houston TX: CyberSociety, 3336 Richmond Ave. #226, Houston, TX
   77098-3022, Voice: 713/520-5020, FAX: 713/520-7395, NETt:
   specdyn@well.sf.ca.us
   
   
   
   Stoughton WI: Andrew's VEE-AR Club, c/o Andrew or Tom Hayward, 624
   Jackson Street, Stoughton, WI 53589
   
   
   
   Boston Computer Society VR Group, c/o Paul Matthews - Director,
   Building 1400, One Kendal Square, Cambridge, MA 02139, Voice: 508 921
   6846 24hr, Voice: 617 252 0600, email:pgm@world.std.com
   
   
   
   Louisville, Kentucky: VRSIG, c/o Andrew Prell, PO Box 43003,
   Louisville, KY 40253, Voice:502 495-7186, email: andrewp@well.sf.ca.us
   
   
   
   Norman Oklahoma:VR Awarness Consotium: 405-447-3276, email:
   gsullivan@aardvark.ucs.uokno.edu or gas@well.sf.ca.us
   
   
   
   Redondo Beach Virtual Reality Group, Contact Mike Heim 2104 Bataan
   Road #2 Redondo Beach CA 310.542.1199
   
   
   
   The Virtual Worlds Society, 4739 University Way, Suite 1628, Seattle,
   WA 98105. Contact: Joel Orr , email: JOEL_ORR@mcimail.com./tel:
   1-800-vws-7711
   
   
   
   Distributed Simulations Applications Research Consortium, 1320 18th
   Street, San Francisco, CA 94107. Tel: 415-861-1317/Fax: 415-431-9368.
   Tom Hargadon - Managing Director, Carl Eugene Loeffler - President.
   
   
   
   VR Alliance for Students and Professionals (VRASP), PO Box 4139,
   Highland Park, New Jersey 08904-4139. Email: kaugust@caip.rutgers.edu
   or 71033.702@compuserve.com.
   
  II.4.2. GROUPS IN OTHER COUTNTRIES
  
   
   
   Belgium: Genootschap voor Virtuele Realiteit (Society for Virtual
   Reality), Philippe Van Nedervelde, Lichtaartsesteenweg 55, B-2275
   Poederlee - Lille, Belgium
   
   
   
   Canada: Univ. of Waterloo VR Group, c/o Rick Kazman (or c/o Bernie
   Roehl), Dept of Computer Science, Univ. of Waterloo, Waterloo,
   Ontario, N2L 3G1, Voice: (519) 888-4870 (R.Kazman), (519) 885-1211
   x2607 (B.Roehl), email: broehl@sunee.uwaterloo.ca
   
   
   
   Toronto Canada: Toronto VRSIG, c/o Caius Tenche, (416) 242-3119,
   email: caius.tenche@canrem.com
   
   
   
   Vancouver BC: Canadian Virtual Worlds Society . Contact Derek Dowden
   604.739.8080 or Andrew Moreno <amoreno@unixg.ubc.ca>
   
   
   
   England: UK-VRSIG, R.Hollands@Sheffield.ac.uk Robin Hollands A&CSE
   Dept.Sheffield University Mappin Street Sheffield S1 3JD -- UK --
   voice +44 (0)742 730066 fax +44 (0)742 731729 or S.M.Clark@lut.ac.uk
   
   
   
   France: Les Virtualistes, 90 Avenue de Paris, 92320 Chatillon, France,
   Voice: 1/47 35 65 48, FAX: 1/47 35 85 88
   
   
   
   Germany: Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics & German Working
   Group on Virtual Reality (Related to Technical University in
   Darmstadt, and to the Computer Graphics Centre (ZGDV) in Darmstadt),
   Mr. Wolfgang Felger, Wilhelminenstr. 7, W-6100 Darmstadt, F.R.G.,
   Voice ++49-6151-155122, Fax.: ++49-6151-155199, email:
   felger@igd.fhg.de, email list: vr@igd.fhg.de
   
   
   
   South Africa VRSIG c/o Roger Layton, Chairman, PO Box 72267, PARKVIEW,
   2122, South Africa, TEL: +27-11-788-5938, FAX: +27-11-442-5529, email:
   74660.2154@compuserve.com
   
II.5. Journals & Newsletters

   
   
   CyberEdge Journal. Excellent professional newsletter, Ben Delaney,
   Editor, #1 Gate Six Road, Suite G, Sausalito, CA 94965, Voice: 415
   331-EDGE (3343), FAX: 415 331-3643, email: 76217.3074@compuserve.com,
   email:bdel@well.sf.ca.us., ISSN# 1061-3099. CyberEdge Journal also
   produces a series of special industry reports on specific sub areas
   and application domains of VR.
   
   
   
   PCVR Magazine. For the home-brew enthusiast. includes Code Disks,
   Editor: Joseph Gradecki, PO Box 475, Stoughton, WI 53589, VOICE/FAX:
   (608) 877-0909, email: 70711.257@compuserve.com or PCVR@fullfeed.com.
   
   
   
   Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments. Professional Tech
   Papers and Journal., MIT Press Journals, 55 Hayward St, Cambridge MA
   02142, (800) 356-0343, (617) 628-8569, (617) 253-2889 (9-5 EST), Fax:
   (617) 258-6779, email: hiscox@mitvma.mit.edu, ISSN 1054-7460
   
   
   
   Real Time Graphics, 2483 Old Middlefield Way #140, Mt. View, CA
   94043-2330, Tel: 415-903-4924, Fax: 415-967-5252, e-mail:
   roy_w_latham@cup.portal.com newsletter, 10/yr., mid-to-high end
   technology, in-depth product coverage, tutorials
   
   
   
   VR Monitor: Frank Dunn, Editor, Matrix Information Services, 18560
   Bungalow Drive, Lathrup Village, MI 48076, Voice: (313) 559-1526,
   email: matrix@well.sf.ca.us, email: 70117.2546@compuserve.com
   
   
   
   PixElation, VRASP c/o Karin August P. O. Box 4139 Highland Park, NJ
   08904-4139 USA, kaugust@caip.rutgers.edu
   
   
   
   Virtural Reality News, Brian Lareau, Editor, Magellan Marketing Inc.
   32969 Hamilton Courts Suite 215, Farmington Hills Mich. 48334
   313-488-0330, email: larryv@msen,com
   
   
   
   VR-NEWS (The Virtual Reality Newsletter), Cydata Publishing Limited,
   P.O. Box 2515, London N4 4JW, England, Tel. & Fax: +44 (0)81-292-1498,
   Managing Editor: Mike Beavan (email: 100024.1425@compuserve.com)
   
   
   
   Virtual Reality Report, Meckler Publishing, Sandra Helsel, Editor in
   Chief, Meckler Corporation, 11 Ferry Lane, Westport CT 06880, Voice:
   (203)226-6967 (Meckler also produces a number of conferences and
   various other VR and computer publications)
   
   
   
   VR Systems, SIG-Advanced Applications, Inc.,1562 First Avenue, Suite
   286, New York, NY 10028, Tel: 212-717-1318, Fax: 212-861-0588/89.
   
   
   
   INTERTECH (German language), published in Vienna, Austria by IDG and
   ICON, fax: +43 1 802 21 76 or e-mail: 100276,1277
   
   
   
   IRIS Universe: The Magazine of Visual Computing. Published quarterly
   by Silicon Graphics, Inc., 2011 North Shoreline Boulevard, Mail Stop
   415, Mountain View, CA 94039-7311. Subscriptions are available to
   qualified users. ISSN 1061-6608
   
   
   
   Pixel Vision. Subscription information: Pixel Vision, Box 1138,
   Madison Square Station, New York, NY 10159. This magazine was new in
   1992. It is published in French and English.
   
   
   
   Realta' Virtuale. Via Rombon 11, 20134 Milano, Italy. 6 issues/year.
   Voice +39 02-26412898 Fax: +39 02-26413279. Diego Montefusco, editor.
   Email: montefus@ghost.dsi.unimi.it.
   
II.6. Professional Societies

   
   
   There are several major professional computer associations that
   publish respected journals related to Virtual Reality.
   
  II.6.1. ACM
  
   
   
   The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) has a number of special
   interest groups whose journals and newsletters often have VR related
   articles. SIGGRAPH is the SIG for Computer Graphics. Their national
   convention is The Event for Computer Graphics each year. The '93
   conference will be in Anahiem CA, August 1-6. SIGCHI is the SIG for
   Computers and Human Interaction. This group has published a lot of
   research on new methods of interacting with computers, including a
   number of new VR applications. Contact info:
   
   
   
   Association for Computing Machinery, 1515 Broadway, 17th Floor, New
   York, NY 10036, (212) 869-7440, email: info.Membership@siggraph.org
   (for membership info), email: info.Siggraph93@siggraph.org (for
   conference info)
   
  II.6.2. IEEE
  
   
   
   The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has a
   computer graphics SIG that publishes an execellent journal called
   "IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications". Subscriptions are $26/year
   for society members, $47 for ACM or other society members, (six
   issues). (The Jan 1994 issue will have a concentration on Virtual
   Reality!) The IEEE also publishes a large number of books and
   conference proceedings. Contact info:
   
   
   
   IEEE Computer Society, PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-9804, (714)
   821-8380, (800) 272-6657 (Publication orders), email:
   membership@compmail.com
   
   
   
   IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine : the quarterly
   magazine of the Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society. ISSN
   0739-5175.
   
  II.6.3. OTHER PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES AND JOURNALS
  
   
   
   Computer Graphics Forum: Journal of the European Association for
   Computer Graphics. Amsterdam : North Holland. ISSN 0167-7055.
   
   
   
   Human Factors. Journal of the Human Factors Society. ISSN 0018-7208.
   
   
   
   Optical Engineering. Published monthly by the Society of Photo-optical
   nstrumentation Engineers (Bellingham, WA: SPIE). ISSN 0091-3286.
   
   
   
   Simulation. Published monthly by Simulation Councils, Inc. Editorial
   and Circulation: Society for Computer Simulation (SCS) P.O. Box 17900,
   San Diego, California 92177. Tel:619-277-3888. ISSN 0037-5497.
   
II.7. Books

   
   
   This section provides a bibliography of some books on VR, Computer
   Graphics and some related subjects. It also provids a listing of
   science fiction books that deal in part with VR and Cyberspace.
   
  II.7.1. VR REFERENCE BOOKS
  
   
   
   Most of these are aimed at the less technical reader, but some will
   include lots of good technical details. Many will include executable
   programs on disk, some with source code. Some of the intro books
   contain bibliographies and listings of companies with VR products,
   including pictures.
   
   
   
   "Adventures in Virtual Reality", Tom Hayward, Que Books, 1993, ISBN
   1-56529-208-1 (includes PC disk with VREAM world and other demos)
   
   
   
   "Artificial Reality II", Myron Krueger, Addison-Wesley, 1991, ISBN:
   0-201-52260-8
   
   
   
   "Computers as Theatre", Brenda Laurel, Addison-Wesley, 1991
   
   
   
   "CYBERARTS: Exploring Art & Technology" Edited by Linda Jacobson,
   Miller Freeman, Inc ISBN 0-87930-253-4
   
   
   
   "Cyberspace - First Steps", MIT Press, 1992 (collection of essays on
   VR), ISBN 0-262-52177-6
   
   
   
   "Flights of Fantasy, Programming 3-D Video Games in C++", Chris
   Lampton, Waite Group, 1993, ISBN 1-878739-18-2 (intro to flight
   simulators, includes excellent intro to fast polygon rendering
   techniques, etc, incl PC Disk w/source code)
   
   
   
   "Garage Virtual Reality", Linda Jacobson, SAMS, (to be published Oct
   1993) ISBN 0-672-30389-2 (A how-to book for the home brew enthusiast)
   (incl PC Disk)
   
   
   
   "Silicon Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality", Steve
   Aukstakalnis & David Blatner, Peach Pit Press 1992,ISBN 0-938151-82-7
   
   
   
   "The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality " , Heim, Michael, Oxford
   University Press, 1993. ISBN 0-19-508178-1
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality", Howard Rheingold, Summit Books, 1991, ISBN
   0-671-69363-8 (one of the first books on VR published. a bit dated
   now.)
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality and the Exploration of Cyberspace", Francis Hamit,
   Sams Publishing, ISBN 0-672-30361-2. (incl PC disk and a very
   extensive bibliography)
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality : Applications and Explorations" ed. Alan Wexelblat,
   Academic Publishers, c1993. ISBN 0-12-745045-9
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality Creations", Dave Stampe Bernie Roehl & John Eagan,
   Waite Group Press, 1993 ISBN 1-878739-39-5 (*the* book on Rend386)
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality - En bog om den kunstige virkelighe" (Danish
   Language) Christian Schade and Morten Steiniche. Borgens Forlag A/S,
   Denmark, march 1993. ISBN 87-418-6751-3
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality Playhouse", Nicholas Lavroff, Waite Group Press, 1992
   ISBN 1-878739-19-0 (includes PC disk, apps are at most WoW interactive
   animations)
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality Systems", ed R.A.Earnshaw, M.A.Gigante, H.Jones.ISBN:
   0 12 227748 Published April 1993.
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality: Theory, Practice, and Promise", Sandra Heisle &
   Judith Roth, Meckler Corp, 1990 LC Call number BD331 .V57 1991
   
   
   
   "Virtual Reality: Through the New Looking Glass", Ken Pimentel & Kevin
   Teixeira, Intel/Windcrest/McGraw-Hill, 1993 ISBN 0-8306-4064-9
   
   
   
   "Virtual Worlds and Multimedia" ed. N. Magnenat Thanlmann & D.
   Thanlmann Wiley, c1993.
   
   
   
   "Virtual Worlds : A Journey in Hype and Hyperreality ", Woolley,
   Benjamin. Blackwell, 1992. LC CALL NUMBER: BD331 .W866 1992
   
  II.7.2. VR DIRECTORIES AND CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS
  
   
   
   "Virtual Reality Sourcebook", Panos, Gregory (ed.). (1992). SophisTech
   Research, 6936 Seaborn St., Lakewood, CA 90713-2832. Telephone:
   310-421-7295. (probably the most complete and extensive commercial
   directory available)
   
   
   
   VR Bibliographic Index. Updated quarterly since 1989. Matrix
   Information Services, 18560 Bungalow Drive, Lathrup Village, MI Email:
   matrix@well.sf.ca.us.
   
   
   
   Virtual Reality Handbook. Available for $248 from Pasha Publications,
   Inc. 1616 N. Ft. Myer Dr., Suite 1000. Tel: 703-528-1244/Fax:
   703-528-1253.
   
   
   
   Virtual World Builder: Virtual Reality and Synthetic Digital
   Environment Products Catalogue and Resource Guide. Spectrum Dynamics,
   2 Greenway Plaza, Suite 640, Houston, TX 77046-0203.
   Tel:713-520-50020/Fax:713-871-1196. Internet:
   specdyn@well.sf.ca.us/Compuserve: 70761,1647.
   
   
   
   "Virtual worlds : real challenges : papers from SRI's 1991 Conference
   on Virtual Reality" Meckler, c1992. LC CALL NUMBER: QA76.9.H85 C445
   1991
   
   
   
   Emerging markets for virtual reality. Boston, MA (214 Harvard Ave.,
   Boston 02134) : IGI Consulting, LC CALL NUMBER: HD9696.C62 E583 1992
   
   
   
   Conference on Virtual Reality, Artificial Reality, and Cyberspace (2nd
   : 1991 : San Francisco, Calif.) Beyond the vision : the technology,
   research, and business of virtual reality : proceedings of Virtual
   Reality '91, the Second Annual Conference on Virtual Reality,
   Artificial Reality, and Cyberspace, San Francisco, September 23-25,
   1991 ; Westport, CT : Meckler, c1992. 237 p. : ill. ; 28 cm. LC CALL
   NUMBER: QA76.9.H85 C67 1991
   
   
   
   "Virtual reality : an International Directory of Research Projects"
   Meckler, 1993.
   
   
   
   "Virtual reality : a selected bibliography", McLellan, Hilary.
   Educational Technology Publications, 1992. LC CALL NUMBER: Z5643.I57
   M4 1992
   
  II.7.3. GOVERNMENT PAPERS
  
   
   
   Durlach, N. I., Aviles, W. A., Pew, R. W., et. al. (eds.). (1992,
   March). Virtual Environment Technology for Training (VETT). (BBN
   Report No. 7661.). Cambridge, MA: Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc.
   
   
   
   Molendi, Gloria and Patriarca, Matteo. (1992). Virtual Reality:
   Medical Researches. Technical Report Number 1/92. Milano, Italy:
   Universita' degli Studi di Milano. Available via anonymous ftp from
   ghost.dsi.unimi.it, in the directory :
   pub2/papers/patriarca/medVR.txt.
   
   
   
   United States Congress. (1992). Virtual Reality : Hearing Before the
   
   Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space of the Committee on
   
   Commerce, Science, and Transportation, and United States Senate.
   
   New Developments in Computer Technology. Washington, DC: U.S.
   
   GPO. (United States. Congress. Senate Hearing; 102-553). LC CALL
   NUMBER: KF26 .C697 1991e
   
   
   
   Defense Science and Technology Strategy, Director of Defence Research
   and Engieneering July 1992 FOFT 02.nov. 003558
   
   
   
   National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Committee on
   Virtual Reality Research & Development, Computer Generation Technology
   Group. (1993). Report on the State-of-the-Art in Computer Technology
   for the Generation of Virtual Environment. Report is yet unpublished.
   
  II.7.4. COMPUTER GRAPHICS BOOKS
  
   
   
   "Computer Graphics (Principles and Applications)", Foley, Van Dam,
   Feiner & Hughes, 2nd Edition, Addison Wesley, 1990 ISBN 0-201-12110-7
   (This is The Bible of Computer Graphics. The classic text book.)
   
   
   
   "Visualization Graphics in C", Lee Adams, Windcrest/McGraw-Hill, 1991,
   ISBN 0-8306-3487-8
   
   
   
   "Fundamentals of Three Dimensional Computer Graphics", Alan Watt,
   Addison Wesley, 1989, ISBN 0-201-15442-0
   
   
   
   "New Trends in Animation and Visualization", Thalmann & Thalmann, John
   Wiley & Sons, 1991, ISBN 0-471-93020-2
   
   
   
   "Physically-Based Modeling for Computer Graphics", Ronen Barzel,
   Academic Press, 1992, ISBN 0-12-079880-8
   
   
   
   "3-D Computer Animation", John Vince, Addison-Wesley ISBN
   #0-201-62756-6.
   
   
   
   "3D Computer Graphics: A User's Guide for Artists and Designers",
   Andrew Glassner.
   
   
   
   "Making Them Move; Mechanics, Control and Animation of Articulated
   Figures", (Book and Video Package) Edited by Norman I. Badler (U
   Pennsylvania), Brian A. Barsky (U CalBerkeley) and David Zeltzer
   (Media Lab, MIT),Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN Book/Video Package:
   1-55860-155-4 Book only: 1-55860-106-6 Tape only: 1-55860-154-6
   
   
   
   "Virtual humans and simulated agents", Badler, Norman I. Oxford
   University Press, 1993.
   
   
   
   "Simulating Humans: Computer Graphic, Animation and Control.", Badler,
   Norman I. May 1993, Oxford University Press
   
   
   
   Virtual Worlds and Multimedia, Edited by Nadia Magnenat Thalmann and
   Daniel Thalmann, pub John Wiley & Sons, 1993, $59.95
   
   
   
   "True Three-Dimensional Graphics", Michael Hyman, Brady Press, 1985
   
   
   
   "Programmin in 3 Dimensions: 3-D Graphics, Ray tracing and Animation":
   Christopher Watkins & Larry Sharp, M&T Books 1992
   
  II.7.5. RELATED BOOKS
  
   
   
   The following books, while not directly about VR technology, can
   provide some background ideas and concepts for VR.
   
   
   
   "Pictorial Communication in Virtual and Real Environments", Stephen R
   Ellis (ed), Taylor & Francis, 1991, ISBN: 0-74840-008-7
   
   
   
   Visual data interpretation : 10-11 February 1992, San Jose, California
   / Bellingham, Wash. : SPIE, c1992. vii, 159 p. : ill. ; LC CALL
   NUMBER: QA76.575 .V57 1992
   
   
   
   "Eccentric Spaces", by Robert Harbison. Boston: David R. Godine, 1988.
   $10.95, Subtitled, "A voyage through real and imagined worlds."
   
   
   
   "The Design and Analysis of Spatial Data Structures", Haman Samet,
   Addison Wesley. 1990, ISBN: 0-201-50255-0
   
   
   
   "Applications of Spatial data Structures", Hanan Samet, 1990, ISBN:
   0-201-50300-X
   
   
   
   "The Visual Display of Quantitative Information", Edward Tufte,
   Graphic Press, 1983
   
   
   
   "Envisioning Information", Edward Tufte, Graphic Press 1990
   
   
   
   "Virtual Worlds, A Journey in Hype and Hyperreality", by Benjamin
   Woolley, published by Blackwell, Oxford, 1992.
   
   
   
   "Eye and Brain. The psychology of seeing (4th edn)", Gregory, R. L.,
   Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1990, ISBN: 297-82042-7 (pbk)
   
   
   
   "Mirror Worlds" by David Gelernter Oxford Univ. Press 1992 ISBN
   0-19-507906-2
   
   
   
   "The craft of text editing", Craig Finseth (Interface Design)
   
   
   
   "The Society of text", Edward Barrett. (Interface Design)
   
  II.7.6. FICTION BOOKS RELATED TO VR
  
   
   
   The following list of Cyberpunk and other VR related books was
   collected from posts to Sci.virtual-worlds and CompuServe's
   CyberForum. I cannot vouch that they are all truely VR related.
   
   
   
   Piers Anthony's "Killobyte."
   
   Stephen Barnes- Street-Lethal, Gorgan's Child
   
   Greg Bear - Blood Music
   
   David Brin - Earth
   
   John Brunner - Shockwave Rider, The Sheep Look Up, Jagged Orbit
   
   William S. Burroughs Naked Lunch, Nova Express, The Ticket that
   Expoloded
   
   Pat Cadigan - Mindplayers, Synners, etc.
   
   Orson Scott Card's Ender's Game
   
   Samuel Delany Nova
   
   Philip K. Dick - Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep, Flow My Tears,
   the Policeman Said The Game-Players of Titan Ubik VALIS The Divine
   Invasion The Transmigration of Timothy Archer
   
   William Gibson - Neuromancer, Count Zero, Mona Lisa Overdrive, Burning
   Chrome, Virtual Light
   
   Stanislav Lem.
   
   Mark Leyner - My Cousin, My Gastroenterologist
   
   Larua Mixon - Glass Houses
   
   Tom Maddox: Halo
   
   Larry Niven's Known Space series of books - really enjoyable stuff.
   
   Marge Piercy, "He, She and It"
   
   Thomas Pynchon: Gravity's Rainbow, V, The Crying of Lot 49, Vineland
   
   Kim Stanley Robinson The Gold Coast
   
   Frank Robinson - The Dark Beyond the Stars
   
   Rudy Rucker - Wetware, Software
   
   Lucius Shepard - Life During Wartime
   
   John Shirley -The Eclipse triology, Freezone
   
   Bruce Sterling - Islands in the Net, The Artificial Kid, Globalhead,
   Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology
   
   Neal Stephenson - Snow Crash
   
   Amy Thompson - Virtual Girl
   
   James Tiptree, Jr. - The Girl who was Plugged In
   
   Vernor Vinge - True Names and Other Dangers, A Fire Upon the Deep
   
   Walter John Williams - Hard-Wired, Voice of the Whirlwind
   
   David Wingrove - Chung-Kuo (series)
   
   Zelaney & Saberhaven - Coils
   
   
   
   "Simulations - 15 tales of virtual reality", edited by Karie Jacobson,
   Citadel Twilight Press. ISBN 0-8065-1406-X
   
   includes: The Crying of Lot 49
   
   1. "The Veldt" (1950) by Ray Bradbury
   
   2. "Overdrawn at the Memory Bank" (1976) by John Varley
   
   3. "Walking the Moons" (1990) by Jonathan Letham
   
   4. "Virtual Reality" (1993) by Michael Kandel
   
   5. "Dogfight" (1985) by Michael Swanwick and Willian Gibson
   
   6. "The Shining Dream Road Out" (1993) by M. Shayne Bell
   
   7. "The Total Perspective Vortex" (1980) by Douglas Adams
   
   8. "Plug-in Yosemite" (1985) by Marc Laidlaw
   
   9. "This Life and Later Ones" (1987) by George Zebrowski
   
   10. "Steelcollar Worker" (1992) by Vonda McIntyre
   
   11. "I Hope I shall Arrive Soon" (1980) by Philip K. Dick
   
   12. "From Here to Eternitape" (1992) by Daniel Pearlman
   
   13. "Pretty Boy Crossover" (1986) by Pat Cadigan
   
   14. "A Guide to Virtual Death" (1992) by J.G. Ballard
   
   15. "The Happy Man" (1963) by Gerald Page
   
   16. Bibliography of VR in fiction
   
II.8. VR Research Labs & Academia

   
   
   This list is woefully incomplete. There is a much more extensive one
   available on ftp.u.washington.edu in the virtual-worlds FAQ area. It
   was neglected for a long time and became very dated. Toni Emerson and
   others at HITL are endeavoring to correct this deficiency.
   
   
   
   CAD Institute, 4100 E. Broadway, Suite 180, Phoenix, AZ 85040, (800)
   658-5744, Dean: John Morrison 76307.1552@compuserve.com
   
   
   
   HITL (Human Interface Technology Laboratory), University of
   Washington, FJ-15, Seattle, WA 98195, (206) 543-5075, Director: Dr.
   Thomas A. Furness III (publishes HITLab Review, contact Alden Jones at
   above address or alden@hitl.washington.edu)
   
   
   
   Visual Systems Laboratory, Institute for Simulation and Training
   Laboratory, University of Central Florida, 12424 Research Parkway,
   Suite 300, Orlando, FL 32826, Director: Dr. Michael Moshell
   
   
   
   UNC Laboratory, Univerisity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Computer
   Science Department, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, Director: Fredrick
   Brooks
   
   
   
   US Navy - Cyberview, David Sarnoff Research Center, Mark Long, CN5300,
   Princeton NJ 08543-5300
   
   
   
   Naval Postgraduate School, Graphics and Video Lab, Department of
   Computer Science, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA 93943-5100,
   Contacts: Dave Pratt, pratt@cs.nps.navy.mil, Prof. Mike Zyda,
   zyda@trouble.cs.navy.mil
   
   
   
   Computer Graphics Laboratory, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada,
   Mark Green, Associate Professor (mark@cs.ualberta.ca) (403) 492-4584
   
   
   
   National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the
   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Contact: Gregory B. Newby,
   Assistant Professor, Graduate School of Library and Information
   Science. Room 417 DKH, 1407 W. Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL, 61801.
   gbnewby@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
   
   
   
   Networked Virtual Art Museum, Studio for Creative Inquiery, Carnigie
   Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213, Carl Loeffler, (412) 268 3452,
   cel+@andrew.cmu.edu
   
II.9. Companies Involved with Virtual Reality

   
   
   Companies involved with or producing VR products. The following is a
   composite of several lists i have found on Internet and CompuServe. It
   is by no way an exhaustive list. There are commercial companies that
   sell such lists (and more info). Some of these are included in the
   list below.
   
   
   
   1-900-VIRTUAL (yes a 1-900 number for VR) cost $1.25/minute
   
   
   
   3D Imagetek , 4525-B San Fernando Rd., Glendale, CA 91204, Phone:
   (818) 507-1269 Fax: (818) 507-8537, Helmet Mounted Displays (HMDs)
   
   
   
   3DTV Corporation, P.O. Box Q, San Francisco, CA 94913-4316, Voice
   (415) 479-3516, Fax 415 479 3316 (LCD shutter glasses, other homebrew
   products)
   
   
   
   Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 7400 MacPherson Ave. #111,
   Burnaby, B.C. V5J 5B6 Canada. 604-434-7274. MouseStick (optical
   joystick for AT bus card) , 3D Sound Card.
   
   
   
   Ascension Technology Corporation. P.O. Box 527, Burlington, VT 05402.
   P.O.Box 527, Burlington, VE 05402, (802) 655-7879. "Bird" family of
   magnetic position sensors.
   
   
   
   Autodesk, Inc. 2320 Marinship Way, Sausalito, CA 94965. (800) 525-2763
   Cyberspace Developers Kit
   
   
   
   Avatar Partners,13090 Central Avenue, Suite 3, Boulder Creek, CA 95006
   USA Tel: (408) 338-6464 Fax: (408) 338-6462 Email:
   avatarp@well.sf.ca.us (Amber C++ programming package and VR Trader
   application)
   
   
   
   CAE Electronics Ltd. C.P. 1800 Saint-Laurent, Quebec, H4L 4X4 Canada.
   514-341-6780. Head-mount displays.
   
   
   
   CiS. 285 Littleton Rd., Ste. 3, Westford, MA 01886. 603-894-5999, 508
   692-2600 (fax). Geometry Ball Jr. (6D joystick).
   
   
   
   Clarity, Nelson Lane, Garrison, NY 10524, Phone: (914) 424-4071 Fax:
   (914) 424-3467,Auditory display products
   
   
   
   Covox, Inc. 675 Conger Street, Eugene, Oregon 97402, Phone: (503)
   342-1271 Fax: (503) 342-1283, "Voicemaster Key System" - PC voice
   interface $150 and other sound related products
   
   
   
   Crystal River Engineering. 12350 Wards Ferry Rd., Groveland, CA 95321.
   209-962-6382. Convolvotron (4 channel 3D audio card for PC).
   
   
   
   Dimension International, Zephyr One Calleva Park, Aldermaston,
   Berkshire RG7 4QZ , Phone: 07 34 810 077 Fax: 816 940, "Superscape"
   PC-based VR, uses 34020 graphics card to speed things up.
   
   
   
   Dimension Technologies, Inc., 176 Anderson Avenue, Rochester, NY
   14607, vox: 716-442-7450, fax: 716-442-7589, DTI 100M, projection
   video stereoviewing system.
   
   
   
   Division Ltd. Quarry Rd., Chipping Sodbury, Bristol B517 6AX England.
   44-0454-324527. 80860-based VR. "Vision VR" hi-end system with
   multiple 80860s. PC-based, lo-end system with one 80860 and one Sharp
   HSSP per eye.
   
   
   
   Division Inc, (US branch of Division Ltd) Dave Bonini, Voice: (415)
   364 6067 Fax: (415) 364 4663 Email: daveb@division.com
   
   
   
   Domark Software, 1900 South Norfolk St #202 San Mateo CA 94402 voice
   415.513.8929, VR Studio package
   
   
   
   Exos 8. Blanchard Road, Burlington, MA 01803. 617229-2075. (617)
   229-2075, Hand-worn interface devices.
   
   
   
   Fake Space Labs. 935 Hamilton Ave., Menlo Park, CA 94025.
   415-688-1940. BOOM (stereo viewer on articulated arm).
   
   
   
   Focal Point Audio 1402 Pine Ave. Suite 127, Niagara Falls, NY 14301.
   415-963-9188. 3D audio boards for Mac and PC.
   
   
   
   Future Vision Technologies, Inc., 701 Devonshire Drive, Champaign, IL
   61820, (217) 355-3030, Fax: (217) 355-3031, Sapphire Multimedia card
   
   
   
   Global Devices, 6630 Arabian Circle, Granite Bay CA 95661,
   (915)791-2558, fax:915-791-4358. 6D controller & navigator -
   joystick/ball devices.
   
   
   
   Gyration, Inc. 12930 Saratoga Ave., Bldg. C, Saratoga, CA 95070.
   408-255-3016. GyroPoint (optically sensed gyroscopic sensors).
   
   
   
   Haitex Resources, Inc., Charleston, South Carolina, 803-881-7518,
   Haitex X-Specs 3D for the Amiga line. (glasses should work with PC
   circuit)
   
   
   
   Horizon Entertainment, P.O. Box 14020, St. Louis MO 63178-4020, (800)
   ILLUSION (455-8746), Virtuality Entertainment Games
   
   
   
   Iwerks, Burbank CA, 818-841-7766, Reactor and other LBE systems
   
   
   
   Leep Systems, 241 Crescent St., Waltham, MA 02154,, Phone: (617)
   647-1395 Fax: (617) 899-9602"Cyberface" HMDs, optics for HMDs.
   
   
   
   Lego Education Systems 800-527-8339, Lego Dacta computerized Lego sets
   
   
   
   Lepton Graphics Systems, 2118 Central SE, Suite 45.Albuquerque, NM
   87106, voice: (505) 843-6719 email: scott@lepton.yenta.abq.nm.us
   "Lepton Virtual Reality Toolkit", C and assembler library for creating
   interactive 3d graphic applications.
   
   
   
   Lightscape Graphics Software, 2 Berkeley St, Suite 600, Toronto ON M5A
   2W3 Canada 416.862.2528 fax 416.862.5508 email rrecker@attmail.com
   
   
   
   Logitech Inc. 6505 Kaiser Drive, Fremont, CA 94555. 415-795-8500.
   (Cyberman, 6D mouse and head tracker).
   
   
   
   Magic 3-D, PO Box 1377, Alexander City, Alabama, 35010, 205-329-3767,
   3D and garage VR stuff. (Ray Bolt), VR HowTo booklet
   
   
   
   Media Magic, Phone: (415) 662-2426, P.O. Box 507 Nicasio, CA 94946,
   Superb catalog of books and videos on VR, Chaos, Fractals, etc.
   
   
   
   MegageM, 1093 Adria, Santa Maria CA 93454, 805-349-1104, email: Daniel
   Wolf 70250.626@compuserve.com. garage VR and stereoscopic products for
   Amiga
   
   
   
   Mira Imaging, Inc. , 2257 South 1100 East, Suite 1A, Salt Lake City,
   Utah 84106, (800) 950-6472, Phone: (801) 466-4641 Fax: (801)
   466-4699"Hyperspace" - 3D digitizing and modeling software
   
   
   
   Myron Krueger, Artificial Reality, 55 Edith, Vernon, CA 06066, Phone:
   (203) 871-1375,Custom-designed virtual world environments
   
   
   
   Pasha Publication, P.O. Box 9188, Arlington, VA 22219, Voice
   800-424-2908, VIRTUAL REALITY HANDBOOK: Products, Services and
   Resources
   
   
   
   The University of Pensylvania,Center for Technology Transfer, 3700
   Market St., Suite 300, Philadelphia, PA 19104, Phone: (215) 898-9585
   Fax: (215) 898-9519, "Jack" - full body sensor positioning system
   
   
   
   Polhelmus, Inc. 1 Hercules Drive, P.O. Box560, Colchester, VT 05446.
   802-655-3159. Polhemus (3Space 6D magnetic tracker).
   
   
   
   Pop-Optix Labs. 241 Crescent Street, Waltham, MA 02154. 617-647-1395.
   Specialized optics for headmount displays.
   
   
   
   The Quest Company 3117 W. Holland Ave. Fresno, CA (209)
   222-5301NorthCad Pro 3d V 9.8 - CAD package that can output files for
   REND386.
   
   
   
   Reel-3D Enterprises, Inc, PO BOX 2368, Culver City CA 90231, (310)
   837-2368, Toshiba LCD Shutter glasses
   
   
   
   Real World Graphics, Phone: 0992 554 442 Fax: 554 827, 5 Bluecoats
   Ave., Hertford SG14 1PB. 80860-based VR systems. "SuperReality" with
   multiple 80860s and texturing ASICs on VME cards. Lo-end "Reality PC"
   has a four-processor PC card with stereo framebuffer. Specialising in
   flight simulation.
   
   
   
   Reflection Technology, 230 Second Ave., Waltham, MA 02154, Phone:
   (617) 890-5905 Fax: (617) 890-5918, "Private Eye" LED-based monochrome
   HMD.
   
   
   
   RPI Advanced Technology Group, POB 14607 San Francisco, CA 94114,
   Phone: (415) 777-3226, "The Personal Simulator" and "HMSI" (Head
   Mounted Sensory Interface device) VGA2x dual channel VGA card, and
   other products.
   
   
   
   Sense8 Corporation. 1001 Bridgeway, P.O. Box 477, Sausalito CA 94965.
   415-331-6318, 415-331-9148 (fax). VR software and systems (for PC, Sun
   & Silicon Graphics) .
   
   
   
   SimGraphics Engineering Corp. 1137 Huntington Drive, South Pasadena,
   CA 91030. 213-255-0900. Systems configuration house/OEM VR equipment
   supplier.
   
   
   
   Simsalabim Systems, Inc. PO Box 4446; Berkeley CA 94704-0446; (800) 3D
   TODAY
   
   Internet: scope@well.sf.ca.us, Fax: 1 800 922 FAXX, Cyberscope
   stereoscopic viewer.
   
   
   
   Shooting Star Technology ,1921 Holdom Ave., Burnaby, BC, V5B 3W4,
   Phone: (604) 298-8574 Fax: (604) 298-8580,Mechanical position sensor
   (approx $1499)
   
   
   
   SophisTech Research, 6936 Seaborn Street, Lakewood, CA 90713-2832,
   (310) 421-7295, (800) 4VR SOURCE (orders only), Virtual Reality
   Sourcebook
   
   
   
   Spaceball Technologies, Inc. 2063 Landings, Sunnyvale, CA 94043.
   408-745- 0330. Spaceball (6D joystick).
   
   
   
   Spectrum Dynamics, 3336 Richmond Ave. #226, Houston, TX 77098-3022,
   Voice: 713/520-5020, Fax : 713/520-7395, email: specdyn@well.sf.ca.us,
   VR equipment distributers, VAR, etc
   
   
   
   StereoGraphics. 21 71-H East Francisco Blvd., San Rafael, CA 94901.
   415- 459-4500. Stereoscopic displays & LCD Shutter Systems.
   
   
   
   StereoCAD, 655 S. Fair Oaks Ave, Suite A-117, Sunnyvale CA 94086
   408.245.5201, fax 408.245.5202. RT Texture VR program.
   
   
   
   Straylight. 150 Mount Bethel Road, Warren, NJ 07050. 908-580-0086. VR
   authoring systems, CyberTron game system.
   
   
   
   Subjective Technologies. 1106 Second Street, Suite 103, Encinitas, CA
   92024. 619-942-0928. Tools for controlling virtual environments.
   
   
   
   TiNi Alloy Co. 1144 65th Street, Unit A, Oakland, CA 94608.
   510-658-3172. Tactile feedback systems.
   
   
   
   Transfinite Systems Co, Inc PO Box N, MIT Branch Post Office,
   Cambridge MA 02139-0903, voc 617-969-9570, Gold Brick device -
   connects Nintendo controllers to Macintosh.
   
   
   
   Transition State, 497 S El Molino Ave, Suite 304, Pasadena CA 91101
   818/568.8640
   
   Virtual Research 1313 Socorro Ave., Sunnyvale, CA 94089. 408-739-7114.
   Flight Helmet (head mounted display).
   
   
   
   Virtual Presence, 25 Corsham St, London, N1 6DR England, 071 253 9699
   fax 071 490 8968, denise@presence.demon.co.uk TCAS Dataware. Lycra
   bodysuit with sensors.
   
   
   
   Virtual Technologies. P.O. Box 5984, Stanford, CA 94309. 415-599-2331.
   Instrumented gloves and clothing.
   
   
   
   Virtual Worlds, 5201 Great America Parkway Suite 320, Santa Clara CA
   95054 - design studio.
   
   
   
   Virtuality Group, 3 Oswin Rd., Brailsford Industrial Park, Leicester
   LE3 1HR, Phone: 0533 542 127 Fax: 548 222, "Virtuality" arcade system
   
   
   
   Vision Research Graphics, 99 Madbury Road, Durham, NH 03824, vox:
   603-868-2270, fax: 603-868-1352, Resellers of Haitex LCD glasses w/PC
   driver & software
   
   
   
   The Vivid Group. 317 Adelaide Street, W., Suite 302, Toronto, Ontario,
   M5V IP9 Canada. 416-340-9290. 416-348-98()9 (fax). Mandala (VR
   authoring systems).
   
   
   
   ViviStar Consulting, 7015 E Aster Dr; Scottsdale Az 85254; (602) 483
   3123, AppleLink: ViviStar CompuServe: 73067,542 Internet:
   ViviStar@ACM.org 3D graphics library for Macintosh
   
   
   
   VREAM. 2568 N. Clark Street, #250, Chicago, IL. 60614. 312-477-0425 VR
   authoring systems.
   
   
   
   VRontier Worlds of Stoughton, Inc. 809 E. South Street, Stoughton, WI.
   53589 (608) 873-8523 FAX: (608) 877-0575 Sales: 800 VR TIER1, Tier1
   HMD, MATE game, etc
   
   
   
   World Design Inc. 5348 1/2 Ballard Ave. Seattle, WA 98107, Phone:
   (206) 782-8630, Robert Jacobson - VR consultants, Information
   Designers
   
   
   
   Xtensory Inc. 140 Sunridge Drive, Scolls Valley, CA 95066.
   408-439-0600. Tactile feedback systems.
<HTLM>
<A HREF="index.html"> Go Back... </A>
</HTML>                                 
